Cognitive Impairment & 
Dementia
CS Lecture 18Chethana Gallage Dona, OMS-II
Goldman-Cecil’s Medicine 26th edition, Chapter 374Layout
●Cognitive Impairment & Dementia 
○Alzheimer Disease 
○Vascular Dementia 
○Lewy Body Dementia 
○Frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
●Compare and contrast with 
○Creutzfeld-Jacob disease (Prion disease)
○Normal pressure hydrocephalus
○Wernicke’s encephalopathy & Korsakoff syndrome (Wernike-Korsakoffs)Dementia definition
●Cognitive disorder, interfere with daily function, 
lead to loss of independence 
●Range from mild to sever (when total 
dependence occur) 
●Conditions that result in dementia, 
○Begin Abruptly, remain static for long 
■Acute neurologic illness secondary to stroke 
■Encephalitis 
■Head trauma 
○Rapid onset, last less than a year 
■Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
○Persons with developmental disabilities & cognitive 
deficits Risk factors: 
●ApoE E4 allele
●Current depressive 
symptoms
●Midlife onset of 
diabetes
●Hypertension
●Hyperlipidemia
●Vascular diseases
●Parenteral history 
before age of 80.Epidemiology
●Increase with advance age 
●Uncommon before 50 years
●Women > Men (women live 
longer)Mild Cognitive Impairment definition
●Earlier phase of symptomatic cognitive impairment that precedes dementia. 
●Based on preservation or loss of independence in daily life 
Clinical manifestations of cognitive impairment & dementia 
●Affect declarative episodic memory, executive function, visuospatial function, 
or language 
●Most common cause of mild cognitive impairment & dementia:  Alzheimer's 
disease
○Anterograde amnesia initially → worsen when progressing to dementia 
●Loss of insight (anosognosia) 
●Neuropsychiatric symptoms 
●Apathy & loss of initiative 
●Depression & anxiety 
●Irritability, paranoia, delusional thinking, hallucinations 
●Daily functioning compromised 
●Some types associated with gait, coordination, balance and strength 
abnormalitiesDiagnosis of cognitive impairment & dementia  
Clinical Exam
●Hx and mental status exam
●Laboratory tests
●Mini Cog test 
●Neuropsychiatric testing 
●Neurologic exam 
○Signs of cerebrovascular 
disease or extrapyramidal 
diseaseGeneral neuroanatomy relevant to discussion of Dementia 
●Symptoms due to dysfunction in cerebral 
hemispheres & white matter interconnections 
○Hippocampal formations & supporting 
cortical structures (caudate nuclei, 
thalamus)
●Affect cerebral cortex, subcortical nuclei, or 
white matter pathways linking different 
cortical regions. 
Differential Diagnosis of Dementia 
Often mistaken for 
●Delirium 
●Major depression
●Bipolar disorder 
●Schizophrenia Primary causes of cognitive impairment & 
dementia 
●Neurodegenerative disease 
○Alzheimer disease
○Lewy body disease 
○Frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration
●Cerebrovascular disease 
●Neurodegenerative diseases - slow insidious onset, 
progressive 
●Cerebrovascular disease - sudden or gradual onsetDrug intoxication
●Sedatives
●Pain medications 
●Corticosteroids 
●Digoxin
*mental confusion
Other differential 
diagnosisMetabolic disorders 
●Hyperthyroidism
●Hypothyroidism
●Vitamin B12 deficiency
●Chronic liver disease
●Chronic renal failure 
●Hypocalcemia 
●Hypercalcemia 
●Chronic viral infections 
●Immunodeficiency virus 
infection
Chronic meningitis 
●Cryptococcus meningitis 
●Tuberculous meningitis
●Tertiary syphilis Brain structural lesions 
●Primary metastatic 
tumors 
●Chronic subdural 
hematomas 
●Normal pressure 
hydrocephalus Dementia prognosis
●Leads to worsening of cognition and function
●Cognitive decline over several years 
●Varies with specific disease 
●Decrease life expectancy by half compared to nondemented individuals
●End-of-life - Patients die from sepsis, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, heart disease 
Management of Dementia / cognitive impairment 
●Focus on specific disease causing the cognitive disorder 
●Symptomatic treatments only available for Alzheimer's disease dementia
●Education & support of caregivers 
●Assessment of functional status
●Screening & management of behavioral and psychiatric symptoms 
●Addressing safety concerns 
●Assessing driving status 
●Advance care planning 
●Pain assessment 
●Pharmacologic treatment of dementia  1.Alzheimer Disease definition (AD)
●Involve Beta-amyloidosis and limbic and isocortical 
neurodegeneration - tauopathy 
●Cognitive disorder → severe dementia 
○with anterograde amnesia - dominant symptom
According to National Institute of Aging: 
“Alzheimer’s disease is a brain disorder that slowly destroys memory and thinking skills and, 
eventually, the ability to carry out the simplest tasks. In most people with the disease — those with 
the late-onset type symptoms first appear in their mid-60s. Early-onset Alzheimer’s occurs between 
a person’s 30s and mid-60s and is very rare. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause of 
dementia among older adults.”Alzheimer disease epidemiology & risk factors 
●65 years and older 
●Prevalence doubles every 5 year 
interval after 65
●Men & women equally affected 
○But women > men (as women live 
longer) 
●No ethnic or racial differences Risk factors 
●Advancing age 
●Family history 
●Diabetes mellitus
●Hypertension
●Cardiovascular disease 
●Head trauma 
●Mid-life vascular risk factors 
●Elevated LDL 
●Low educational achievements Alzheimer’s Disease Pathophysiology
●Neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary 
tangles accumulate. 
●Neuritic plaques
○Contain core B-amyloid peptide  
surrounding degenerating fragments 
of dendrites and axons 
○B-amyloid contain 39-42 a.a. Derived 
from amyloid precursor protein
●Neurofibrillary tangles 
○Intracellular aggregates of 
microtubule-associated protein Tau
●Cholinergic transmission affected 3 know genes in Autosomal dominant AD
●Amyloid precursor protein (APP) - 
chromosome 21 
●Presenilin 1 & 2 - chromosomes 1 
and 14
Later onset AD 
●Apolipoprotein E (APOE)  on 
chromosome 19 
●APOE E4 allele - seen in most AD 
dementia patients 
*Rare missense mutation in TREM2 
gene also increase AD riskAD: Differential Diagnosis 
●Lewy body dementia  - Parkinson’s disease 
●Huntington disease 
●Progressive supranuclear palsy 
●Corticobasal degeneration 
●Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
●Wilson disease 
●Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
●Cerebrovascular disease AD Prevention 
●No established preventive therapies
●Limited evidence support: healthy diet, physical exercise, and stimulating cognitive leisure 
activities in prevention
AD Evidence-Based Treatments:
●Two approved drug classes
○Cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine) and 
○Memantine (glutamate receptor antagonist).
●Cholinomimetic drugs delay symptom progression in mild to moderate dementia
●Memantine delays functional decline, but individual responses vary
●Vitamin B supplementation not effective in slowing cognitive decline
●Treatment of diabetes and hypertension beneficial for other reasons, unclear impact on 
Alzheimer's
●Vitamin E may delay progression in moderately severe Alzheimer'sIneffective Approaches - No efficacy or clinical benefit
●Multivitamins and drugs targeting β-amyloid peptides or 5-hydroxytryptamine 6 receptor 
●Antidepressants
●Humanized monoclonal Ab targeting amyloid forms
Post-Symptomatic Care
●Exercise not helpful for preventing progression after Alzheimer's becomes symptomatic.
●Support for family caregivers is crucial.
●Supervision of medications, finances, motor vehicle operation, and potentially 
dangerous tools is essential.
●Identification of patients to prevent wandering and tragic occurrences.MRI and Imaging Alzheimer Disease 
The scan of a patient with alzheimer disease 
dementia, the neocortex is preserved even 
though there is atrophy involving the amygdala 
and head of the hippocampus (arrows).
Amyloid positron emission tomographic (PET) scan of a patient with Alzheimer disease dementia. on this axial image of a 
11C pittsburgh compound B pet scan,the left scan is from an individual with no cortical amyloid retention. the green signal 
represents low levels of nonspecific white matter binding. on the right, a scan of a patient with alzheimer disease dementia 
shows the prominent retention of the amyloid imaging agent in the frontal, parietal, and posterior cingulate cortices (arrows)
AV1451 (tau) positron emission tomographic (PET) scan of a patient with Alzheimer disease dementia. on axial images, the tau pet signal can be 
seen in the temporal and parietal lobes. the left scan at the level of the temporal lobes shows the increased signal (red and yellow) representing tau 
deposition. the right scan at the level of the lateral ventricles shows the tau deposition to be widespread in the parietal lobes, including the precuneus 
in the medial parietal lobes and lateral frontal lobes.
2. Dementia caused by Cerebrovascular Disease 
Definition: 
●Cerebral infarction in 
locations responsible for the 
cognitive deficits 
●Absence of other 
neurodegenerative disease Epidemiology: Dementia caused by Cerebrovascular Disease 
●> 65 years of age 
●Cerebrovascular disease 
●Men and women equally affected 
Risk factors 
●Cardiovascular disease 
●Atrial fibrillation
●High glucose levels
●Diabetes
●HypertensionPathobiology: Dementia caused by Cerebrovascular Disease 
●Vascular disease mainly due to atherosclerosis
●Large infarctions 
○Carotid arteries, anterior, middle and posterior cerebral arteries 
●Lacunar infarctions 
○In thalamus, basal ganglia and subcortical white matter 
●Microinfarcts 
●Microinfarcts and lacunar infarct common in patients with dementia
●Simultaneous presence of Alzheimer's with vascular dementia is also common
●Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) - rare 
●Cerebral amyloid angiopathy - a Beta-amyloidosis
●Cerebral vasculitis Clinical presentation: of cerebrovascular dementia 
●Mild Cognitive Impairment 
●Dementia with Anterograde Amnesia
●Dementia with Personality and Executive Function Changes
●Aphasia Syndromes: Cerebral infarction or hemorrhage in perisylvian 
regions of the dominant hemisphere.
●Visual Cognition Disorders: Occipitotemporal or occipitoparietal infarctions 
→ alexia or visual agnosia.
●Caudate Nuclei Infarcts: mimic dementia with both amnesia and disordered 
executive function.
●Right Parietal Lobe Infarcts:  dementia.
●Medial Thalami or Hippocampal Formations Infarcts:  isolated amnesia.Evolution of Symptoms:
●No stereotypical pattern; varies among individuals.
●Cognitive syndromes may remain static or decline.
●New strokes may lead to substantial declines.
●Vascular Cognitive Impairment Presentation:
○Symptoms may evolve gradually or be triggered by new strokes.
○Coexistence with other typical neurologic signs of cerebrovascular disease (hemiparesis, 
hemianopia, hemisensory changes, cranial nerve abnormalities).Diagnosis
Prevention & Treatment 
●Treat vascular risk factors in midlife 
●Early treatment of diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia and use of 
prophylactic anticoagulants in pts with atrial fibrillation 
●After vascular dementia develops 
○Cholinesterase inhibitors - some benefit
●Major goal is to prevent future strokes 
●Prognosis
○With severe cardiovascular disease → more likelihood of future strokes, cardiac ischemia
○Survival poorer than that of patients with Alzheimer's dementia 3. Dementia with Lewy Bodies 
Definition:
●Lewy bodies in the limbic system and cortical structures 
●In some patients Parkinsonism precedes or occurs simultaneously with or 
before movement disorder Lewy body dementia: Epidemiology 
●Advancing age
●No racial differences
●More common in men 
●No known risk factors 
●Dementia develops in 30% of patients with Parkinson’s disease Lewy body dementia: Pathobiology
●Lewy bodies 
○Intraneuronal inclusions with alpha synuclein in nucleus basalis, parts compacta of substantia 
nigra, locus ceruleus, brainstem structures, amygdala, cingulate gyrus, neocortex, CN IX and 
X 
●Alpha synuclein protein  misfolds and aggregates within neurons. 
●Mutations in alpha synuclein gene seen in autosomal dominant Parkinson’s 
disease. 
●But most dementia cases with Lewy bodies are sporadic Lewy Body Dementia: Clinical Manifestations
●Four major abnormalities: 
○cognitive disorder, neuropsychiatric disorder, motor disorder, sleep and wakefulness 
disorder.
●Executive function deficits may resemble frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration.
●Cognitive Symptoms in Dementia with Lewy Bodies:
○Visuospatial deficits, impaired concentration, and attention dominate.
○Mild anterograde amnesia, less severe than in Alzheimer's.
○Language deficits are not prominent.
●Neuropsychiatric Manifestations:
○Prominent apathy, loss of initiative, and depressionLewy Body Dementia: Clinical Manifestations continued..
●Motor Symptoms:
○Bradykinesia, gait disturbances, postural issues, and rigidity.
○Rest tremor less common if cognitive disorder precedes parkinsonism.
●Sleep and Wakefulness Disorder:
○Visual hallucinations often detailed and bizarre, related to intrusion of dreaming into 
wakefulness.
○Large fluctuations in alertness and arousal from day to day.
○REM Sleep Behavior Disorder (RBD): Parasomnia with dream enactment behavior, 
often violent and threatening.
●May precede Parkinson's and dementia with Lewy bodies by years.Lewy Body Dementia: Differential Diagnosis
●Progressive supranuclear palsy 
●Huntington disease 
●Normal pressure hydrocephalus 
Prognosis: More rapidly progressing and poor survival than AD dementia. Treatment 
Motor Disorder:
●Levodopa and dopaminergic agonists  for 
gait or balance problems.
●Potential worsening of hallucinations and 
confusion
Hallucinations and Agitation:
●Use caution with antipsychotic agents to 
avoid exacerbating parkinsonism.
●Atypical antipsychotics  recommended, 
with quetiapine or clozapine  often 
preferred for lower extrapyramidal side 
effects.
●Limited evidence from controlled trials; 
risk of higher mortality with atypical 
antipsychotics.REM Sleep Behavior Disorder:
●No controlled trials for treatment.
●Options include melatonin (3-12 mg) or 
clonazepam (0.5-2 mg) at bedtime.
Depressive Symptoms:
●Newer generation antidepressants (e.g., 
sertraline, citalopram) may improve 
functioning without interfering with other 
symptoms.
Neuropsychiatric Symptoms:
●Cholinesterase inhibitors  
●Address autonomic disturbances 
cautiously due to anticholinergic risks.4. Dementia due to Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration
Definition:
●Neurodegenerative Disorder with distinct clinical manifestations, with a 
predilection for prefrontal and anterior temporal neocortex. 
●Involve different aspects of language and motor dysfunction of limbs 
●Behavior-variant frontotemporal dementia 
○Disorder of behavior and personal relationships Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration: Epidemiology
●Peak onset 50 -70 
●Incidence declines after 70
●Much less common than other types of dementia 
●Men and women equally affected 
●No known risks (except family history)
 Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration: Pathobiology
●Determined by lobar location of the pathologic process.
○Right prefrontal or anterior temporal lobe - behavioral syndromes 
○Left frontal lobe - progressive nonfluent aphasia.
○Predominant left anterior temporal lobe - semantic dementia.
●Histopathologic Classifications:
○Tau-positive inclusions group (e.g., Pick disease, progressive supranuclear palsy).
○TDP-43-positive inclusions group (mutations in GRN gene on chromosome 17q21).
○FUS-positive cases (less common, associated with the behavioral variant of frontotemporal 
dementia).
●Genetic Mutations:
○MAPT gene mutations on chromosome 17q21 (autosomal dominant syndromes).
○GRN gene mutations on chromosome 17q21 (linked to TDP-43-positive inclusions).
○C9ORF72 gene mutation on chromosome 9p21 (common in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration: Clinical manifestations 
●Insidious onset with initial symptoms of apathy, loss of initiative.
●Progresses to behavioral changes linked to frontal and anterior temporal lobes dysfunction.
●Cognitive assessments reveal preserved memory but executive function difficulty.
●Advanced Stages of FTD:
○Prominent behavioral changes
○Behavior-variant FTD pathology: tau-positive or TDP-43 positive.
●Motor Neuron Disease and Aphasic Disturbances:
○Signs of motor neuron disease 
○Nonfluent/agrammatic and semantic variants of primary progressive aphasia.
●Nonfluent/Agrammatic Primary Progressive Aphasia:
○Speech difficulties, hesitancy, nonfluent, apractic, agrammatic speech.
○Often tau-positive neuropathologic findings.
●Semantic Variant Primary Progressive Aphasia:
○Involves dissolution of meaning, difficulty accessing knowledge.
○Preservation of the ability to learn a list of words.
○Usually has TDP-43-positive neuropathologic findings.Imaging 
Treatment & Prognosis
●No symptomatic therapy 
●Atypical antipsychotics (Quetiapine) - in patients with agitation, paranoia, 
delusions of obsessive disorder
●No preventative or disease modifying treatment
Prognosis: 
●Differ between specific frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes 
●Motor neuron symptoms - poor prognosis 
●Semantic variant and nonfluent variant primary progressive aphasia - gradual 
progression
○Can survive more than 10 years 
●Behavioral variant - more protracted course DiseaseCourse Clinical presentation Diagnosis 
Alzheimer diseaseSlow progressive, 8-10 years Episodic impairment of memory, language impairment (Naming, comprehension, fluency)Neuritic plaques (amyloid beta peptides) accumulate extracellularly, Neurofibrillary tangles (Tau protein) accumulate intracellularly, diffuse cortical atrophy, hippocampal atrophy. 
Creu