Dizziness :  Approach to Evaluation & Management (AAFP),  Learning Objectives  
 
• Recognize the diff erential diagnosis for common causes of dizziness and vertigo ; define the 
entities included in the differential:  
o BPPV, vestibular neuritis, Meniere disease, otosclerosis, vestibular migraine, 
cerebrovascular disease (esp. vertebrobasilar), meningioma, psychiatric, medication -
induced, orthostatic, cardiovascular/metabolic , barotrauma  
• Recognize and apply methods used to distinguish causes of dizziness  
• Distinguish acuity of patient presentation  - benign vs. emergent , and appropriate corresponding 
management  
• Define the following clinical categorizations of dizziness:  episodic triggered, spontaneous 
episodic, continuous vestibular  
• Distinguish  between centr al & peripheral vertigo ; recognize methods used to distinguish , e.g., 
HINTS examination . See diagnostic algorithm in article.  
• Describe necessary components of the history  (triggers, timing , medications ; HINTS ) and 
physical exam (TiTrATE , specific maneuvers  when indicate d) when evaluating a patient for 
dizziness or vertigo  
• Recognize  specific  importance of HEENT, cardiac, neurologic physical exam, orthostatic BP 
measurement in physical exam evaluation of  dizziness; evaluation of head -impulse, nystagmus, 
test of skew  
• Describe the Dix- Hallpike maneuver and recognize its utility and interpretation  
• Describe common medications associated with dizziness  
• Describe treatment options for the entities described in the article (BPPV, Meniere disease, 
vestibular neuritis)  
o Describe commonly used vestibular suppressant medications  
• Define and describe the following clinical entities, including etiology/pathophysiology, clinical 
presentation, diagnostic criteria and workup , including labs and imaging , and disease 
management:  
o Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo  (peripheral)  
o Meniere disease (peripheral)  
o Vestibular neuritis  (peripheral)  
o Vestibular migraine  (central)  
o Vertebrobasilar ischemia (central)  154 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 95, Number 3  ◆ February 1, 2017Dizziness is a common yet imprecise symptom. It was traditionally divided into four categories based on the patient’s 
history: vertigo, presyncope, disequilibrium, and light-headedness . However, the distinction between these symp -
toms is of limited clinical usefulness. Patients have difficulty describing the quality of their symptoms but can more 
consistently identify the timing and triggers. Episodic vertigo triggered by head motion may be due to benign parox -
ysmal positional vertigo. Vertigo with unilateral hearing loss suggests Meniere disease. Episodic vertigo not associated 
with any trigger may be a symptom of vestibular neuritis. Evaluation focuses on determining whether the etiology is 
peripheral or central. Peripheral etiologies are usually benign. Central etiologies often require urgent treatment. The 
HINTS ( head-impulse , nystagmus, test of skew) examination can help distinguish peripheral from central etiologies. 
The physical examination includes orthostatic blood pressure measurement, a full cardiac and neurologic examina -
tion, assessment for nystagmus, and the Dix-Hallpike  maneuver. Laboratory testing and imaging are not required and 
are usually not helpful. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo can be treated with a canalith repositioning procedure 
(e.g., Epley maneuver). Treatment of Meniere disease includes salt restriction and  diuretics. Symptoms of vestibu -
lar neuritis are relieved with vestibular suppressant medications and vestibular rehabilitation. ( Am Fam Physician . 
2017;95(3): 154-162 . Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Family Physicians.)Dizziness: Approach to Evaluation  
and Management
HERBERT L. MUNCIE, MD, Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana
SUSAN M. SIRMANS, P harm D, University of Louisiana at Monroe School of Pharmacy, Monroe, Louisiana
ERNEST JAMES, MD, Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana
Dizziness is a common yet im ­
precise symptom often en­
coun  tered by family physicians. 
Primary care physicians see at 
least one­half  of the patients who present 
with dizziness.1 The differential diagnosis is 
broad, with each of the common etiologies 
accounting for no more than 10% of cases2 
(Table 11,3). Because the symptoms are vague, 
physicians must distinguish benign from se ­
rious causes that require urgent evaluation 
and treatment.
Dizziness was traditionally classified 
into four categories based on the patient’s 
description: (1) vertigo, (2) presyncope, (3) 
disequilibrium, and (4) light ­headedness .4 
However, current approaches do not include 
presyncope and do not use the vague term 
light ­headedness .5 Patients often have dif ­
ficulty describing their symptoms and may 
give conflicting accounts at different times.3 
Symptom quality does not reliably predict 
the cause of dizziness.6 Physicians are cau ­
tioned against overreliance on a descriptive 
approach to guide the diagnostic evalua ­
tion.7 Alternatively, attention to the timing and triggers of dizziness is preferred over the 
symptom type because patients more consis ­
tently report this information.3,7
General Approach 
Questions regarding the timing (onset, 
duration, and evolution of dizziness) and 
triggers (actions, movements, or situations) 
that provoke dizziness can categorize the 
dizziness as more likely to be peripheral or 
central in etiology. Findings from the physi ­
cal examination can help confirm a probable 
diagnosis. A diagnostic algorithm can help 
determine whether the etiology is peripheral 
or central (Figure 1).
TITRATE THE EVALUATION
TiTrATE is a novel diagnostic approach to 
determining the probable etiology of diz ­
ziness or vertigo.2 The approach uses the 
Timing of the symptom, the Triggers that 
provoke the symptom, And a Targeted 
Examination. The responses place the diz ­
ziness into one of three clinical scenarios: 
episodic triggered, spontaneous episodic, or 
continuous vestibular.CME This clinical content 
conforms to AAFP criteria 
for continuing medical 
education (CME). See  
CME Quiz Questions on 
page 149.
Author disclosure: No rel -
evant financial affiliations.▲
 Patient information : 
A handout on this topic, 
written by the authors of 
this article, is available 
at http://www.aafp.org/
afp/2017/0201/p 154-s1.
html.
Downloaded from the American Family Physician website at www.aafp.org/afp. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Family Physicians. For the private, noncom -
mercial use of one individual user of the website. All other rights reserved. Contact copyrights@aafp.org for copyright questions and/or permission requests.DizzinessFebruary 1, 2017  ◆ Volume 95, Number 3  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  155With episodic triggered symptoms, patients 
have brief episodes of intermittent dizziness 
lasting seconds to hours. Common triggers 
are head motion on change of body position 
(e.g., rolling over in bed). Episodic triggered 
symptoms are consistent with a diagnosis of 
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).
With spontaneous episodic symptoms (no 
trigger), patients have episodes of dizziness 
lasting seconds to days. Because these epi ­
sodes have no trigger, the patient’s history 
establishes the diagnosis. Common diagnos ­
tic considerations for spontaneous episodic 
symptoms include Meniere disease, vestibu ­
lar migraine, and psychiatric diagnoses such 
as anxiety disorders. Symptoms associated 
with lying down are more likely vestibular.
With continuous vestibular symptoms, 
patients have persistent dizziness lasting 
days to weeks. The symptoms may be due to 
traumatic or toxic exposure. Classic vestibu ­
lar symptoms include continuous dizziness 
or vertigo associated with nausea, vomiting, 
nystagmus, gait instability, and head­ motion  
intolerance. In the absence of trauma or 
exposures, these findings are most consistent 
with vestibular neuritis or central etiologies. 
However, central causes can also occur with 
patterns triggered by movement.
HISTORY: TIMING, TRIGGERS,  
AND MEDICATIONS
Patients who describe a sensation of self­
motion  when they are not moving or a sensa ­
tion of distorted self­motion  during normal 
head movement may have vertigo.5 Vertigo 
is the result of asymmetry within the ves ­
tibular system or a disorder of the peripheral  
labyrinth or its central connections.8,9 The SORT: KEY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE
Clinical recommendationEvidence 
rating References
Vertigo associated with unilateral hearing loss should raise suspicion for Meniere disease. C 41 
The physical examination in patients with dizziness should include orthostatic blood pressure measurement, 
nystagmus assessment, and the Dix-Hallpike maneuver for triggered vertigo.C 16 
The HINTS (head-impulse, nystagmus, test of skew) examination can help differentiate a peripheral cause of 
vestibular neuritis from a central cause. C 20
Laboratory testing and imaging are not recommended when no neurologic abnormality is found on examination. C 1
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is treated with a canalith repositioning procedure (e.g., Epley maneuver). A 30
Vestibular neuritis symptoms may be relieved with medication and vestibular rehabilitation. C 20
Meniere disease may improve with a low-salt diet and diuretic use. B 41 
A = consistent, good-quality  patient-oriented  evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-quality  patient-oriented  evidence; C = consensus, disease-oriented  
evidence, usual practice, expert opinion, or case series. For information about the SORT evidence rating system, go to http://www.aafp.org/afpsort.
Table 1. Differential Diagnosis of Dizziness and Vertigo: 
Common Causes 
Cause (most to  
least frequent) Clinical description
Peripheral causes
Benign paroxysmal  
positional vertigoTransient triggered episodes of vertigo caused by 
dislodged canaliths in the semicircular canals
Vestibular neuritis Spontaneous episodes of vertigo caused by 
inflammation of the vestibular nerve or 
labyrinthine organs, usually from a viral infection
Meniere disease Spontaneous episodes of vertigo associated 
with unilateral hearing loss caused by excess 
endolymphatic fluid pressure in the inner ear
Otosclerosis Spontaneous episodes of vertigo caused by 
abnormal bone growth in the middle ear and 
associated with conductive hearing loss
Central causes
Vestibular migraine Spontaneous episodes of vertigo associated with 
migraine headaches
Cerebrovascular disease Continuous spontaneous episodes of vertigo 
caused by arterial occlusion or insufficiency, 
especially affecting the vertebrobasilar system
Cerebellopontine angle 
and posterior fossa 
meningiomas Continuous spontaneous episodes of dizziness 
caused by vestibular schwannoma (i.e., acoustic 
neuroma), infratentorial ependymoma, brainstem 
glioma, medulloblastoma, or neurofibromatosis
Other causes
Psychiatric Initially episodic, then often continuous episodes of 
dizziness without another cause and associated 
with psychiatric condition (e.g., anxiety, 
depression, bipolar disorder)
Medication induced Continuous episodes of dizziness without another 
cause and associated with a possible medication 
adverse effect
Cardiovascular/
metabolicAcute episodic symptoms that are not associated 
with any triggers
Orthostatic Acute episodic symptoms associated with a change 
in position from supine or sitting to standing
Information from references 1 and 3.Dizziness156 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 95, Number 3  ◆ February 1, 2017distinction between vertigo and dizziness is of limited 
clinical usefulness.2
If vertigo is described, physicians should ask about 
hearing loss, which could suggest Meniere disease.10 
Diagnostic criteria for Meniere disease include episodic 
vertigo (at least two episodes lasting at least 20 minutes) 
associated with documented low ­ to medium­ frequency  
sensorineural hearing loss by audiometric testing in the 
affected ear and tinnitus or aural fullness in the affected 
ear.10 The auditory symptoms are initially unilateral.
Physicians should determine whether the vertigo is 
triggered by a specific position or change in position. 
BPPV is triggered with sudden changes in position, such 
as a quick turn of the head on awakening or tipping the 
head back in the shower. Dizziness from orthostatic 
hypotension occurs with movement to the upright posi ­
tion. Clinicians may erroneously assume that dizziness 
that worsens with movement is associated with a benign 
condition in patients with persistent dizziness.11 However,  exacerbation of symptoms with movement is common to 
most causes of persistent dizziness and does not aid in 
determining whether the etiology is peripheral vs. central 
(benign vs. dangerous).7 
WHAT IS NEW ON THIS TOPIC: EVALUATION  
OF DIZZINESS
TiTrATE is a novel diagnostic approach to determine the 
probable etiology of dizziness or vertigo. It uses the Timing of 
the symptom, the Triggers that provoke the symptom, And a 
Targeted Examination. The patient’s response determines the 
classification of dizziness as episodic triggered, spontaneous 
episodic, or continuous vestibular.
In a study of older patients in a primary care setting, 
medications were implicated in 23% of cases of dizziness.
The HINTS (head-impulse, nystagmus, test of skew) examination 
can help differentiate a peripheral cause of vestibular neuritis 
from a central cause.Assessment of Dizziness
Figure 1.  Algorithm for the diagnostic evaluation of dizziness. (HINTS = head-impulse , nystagmus, test of skew.) *—Exacerbation of symptoms with movement does not aid in determining whether the etiology is peripheral vs. central.
†—Central causes can also occur with patterns triggered by movement.Patient presents with dizziness or vertigo
Is the timing episodic or continuous?
Continuous
Is it associated with trauma 
or toxins, or spontaneous?
Spontaneous
HINTS examination
No saccade, nystagmus 
dominantly vertical, 
torsional or gaze-
evoked bidirectional, 
abnormal test of skew
Central etiology †
Stroke or transient 
ischemic attackSaccade present, 
unidirectional 
horizontal nystagmus, 
normal test of skew
Peripheral etiology
Vestibular neuritisEpisodic
Is it triggered or spontaneous?
Spontaneous
Migraine 
headache
Vestibular 
migrainePsychiatric 
symptoms
Panic attack, 
psychiatric 
conditionHearing loss
Meniere 
diseasePositive
Benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigoNegative
Assess for 
orthostatic 
hypotensionTriggered*
Dix-Hallpike maneuverTrauma or toxin
Barotrauma MedicationsDizzinessFebruary 1, 2017  ◆ Volume 95, Number 3  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  157Medications were implicated in 23% of cases of 
dizziness in older adults in a primary care setting12 
(Table 21,13,14). The use of five or more medications is 
associated with an increased risk of dizziness.15 Older 
patients are particularly susceptible to medication 
adverse effects because of age­related  pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic changes.13
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Findings from the physical examination—including a 
cardiac and neurologic assessment, with attention to the 
head, eye, ear, nose, and throat examination—are usu ­
ally normal in patients presenting with dizziness.
Blood pressure should be measured while the patient 
is standing and in the supine position.16 Orthostatic 
hypotension is present when the systolic blood pres ­
sure decreases 20 mm Hg, the diastolic blood pressure 
decreases 10 mm Hg, or the pulse increases 30 beats per 
minute after going from supine to standing for one min ­
ute.17 A full neurologic examination should be performed 
in patients with orthostatic dizziness but no hypotension 
or BPPV.
The patient’s gait should be observed and a Romberg 
test performed. Patients with an unsteady gait should be 
assessed for peripheral neuropathy.18 A positive Romberg 
test suggests an abnormality with proprioception recep ­
tors or their pathway.
The use of the HINTS ( head ­impulse , nystagmus, test 
of skew) examination can help distinguish a possible 
stroke (central cause) from acute vestibular syndrome 
(peripheral cause).19 A video demonstrating this exami ­
nation is available at http://www.kaltura.com/index.
php/extwidget/preview/partner_id/797802/uiconf_id/  
27472092/entry_id/0_b9t6s0wh/embed/auto.
Head-Impulse . While the patient is sitting, the head is 
thrust 10 degrees to the right and then to the left while 
the patient’s eyes remain fixed on the examiner’s nose. 
If a saccade (rapid movement of both eyes) occurs, the 
etiology is likely peripheral.20 No eye movement strongly 
suggests a central etiology.19
Nystagmus . The patient should follow the examiner’s 
finger as it moves slowly left to right. Spontaneous unidi ­
rectional horizontal nystagmus that worsens when gazing 
in the direction of the nystagmus suggests a peripheral 
cause (vestibular neuritis).7 Spontaneous nystagmus that 
is dominantly vertical or torsional, or that changes direc ­
tion with the gaze ( gaze ­evoked  bidirectional) suggests a 
central etiology. Central pathology nystagmus changes 
direction less than half the time6 and can be suppressed 
with fixation.21 A video ­oculography  device is avail ­
able to quantitatively measure eye movement.22 Frenzel  goggles used to detect involuntary eye movements have 
been helpful with nystagmus assessment.23
Test of Skew . Test of skew is assessed by asking the 
patient to look straight ahead, then cover and uncover 
each eye. Vertical deviation of the covered eye after 
uncovering is an abnormal result. Although this is a less 
sensitive test for central pathology, an abnormal result is 
fairly specific for brainstem involvement.
Table 2. Medications Associated with Dizziness
Medication Causal mechanism 
Alcohol
Antiarrhythmics, class 1a
Antidementia agents
Antiepileptics
Antihistamines (sedating)
Antihypertensives
Anti-infectives: anti-influenza 
agents, antifungals, quinolones
Antiparkinsonian agents
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder agents
Digitalis glycosides
Dipyridamole 
Narcotics
Nitrates
Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors
Skeletal muscle relaxants 
Sodium–glucose cotransporter-2 
inhibitors
Urinary anticholinergicsCardiac effects: 
hypotension, postural 
hypo  tension, torsades 
de pointes, other 
arrhythmias
Skeletal muscle relaxants
Urinary and gastrointestinal 
antispasmodicsCentral anti  cholinergic 
effects
Antiepileptics
Benzodiazepines
LithiumCerebellar toxicity
Antidiabetic agents
Beta adrenergic blockersHypoglycemia
Aminoglycosides
Antirheumatic agentsOtotoxicity
Anticoagulants 
Antithyroid agents Bleeding complications 
(anti coagulants), bone 
marrow suppression 
(anti thyroid agents)
Information from references 1, 13, and 14.Dizziness158 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 95, Number 3  ◆ February 1, 2017BPPV is diagnosed with the Dix­ Hallpike  maneuver 
(Figure 2).24 Transient upbeat ­torsional  nystagmus dur ­
ing the maneuver is diagnostic of BPPV if the timing and 
trigger are consistent with BPPV. Nystagmus may not 
develop immediately, and a sense of vertigo may occur 
and last for one minute. A negative result does not rule 
out BPPV if the timing and triggers are consistent with 
BPPV.25 Nystagmus with the maneuver may be due to a 
central etiology, especially if the timing and trigger are 
not consistent with BPPV.
LABORATORY TESTING AND IMAGING
Most patients presenting with dizziness do not require 
laboratory testing. Patients with chronic medical condi ­
tions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hypertension) may require 
blood glucose and electrolyte measurements. Patients 
with symptoms suggestive of cardiac disease should 
undergo electrocardiography, Holter monitoring, and 
possibly carotid Doppler testing. However, in a summary 
analysis of multiple studies that included 4,538 patients, 
only 26 (0.6%) had a laboratory result that explained 
their dizziness.16
Routine imaging is not indicated.1 However, any 
abnormal neurologic finding, including asymmetric or 
unilateral hearing loss, requires computed tomography 
or magnetic resonance imaging to evaluate for cerebro ­
vascular disease. Hearing loss with vertigo and normal 
neuroimaging suggests Meniere disease. 
Peripheral Etiologies
Peripheral causes of dizziness arise from abnormalities 
in the peripheral vestibular system, which is comprised of the semicircular canals, the saccule, the utricle, and 
the vestibular nerve. Common peripheral causes of diz ­
ziness/vertigo include BPPV, vestibular neuritis (i.e., ves ­
tibular neuronitis), and Meniere disease.26
BENIGN PAROXYSMAL POSITIONAL VERTIGO 
BPPV occurs when loose otoconia, known as canaliths, 
become dislodged and enter the semicircular canals, usu ­
ally the posterior canal.27 BPPV can occur at any age, but 
is most common between 50 and 70 years.28 No obvious 
cause is found in 50% to 70% of older patients, but head 
trauma is a possibility in younger persons.29
Treatment of BPPV consists of a canalith repositioning 
procedure such as the Epley maneuver, which repositions 
the canalith from the semicircular canal into the vestibule30 
(Figure 324). The success rate is approximately 70% on the 
first attempt, and nearly 100% on successive maneuvers.29 
Home treatment with Brandt ­Daroff  exercises (http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=voZXtTUdQ00 ) can also be 
successful. If there is no improvement with repeated reposi ­
tioning maneuvers, or if atypical or ongoing nystagmus with 
nausea is present, another cause should be considered.27
Pharmacologic treatment has no role in the treatment 
of BPPV. Vestibular suppressant medications should be 
avoided because they interfere with central compensa ­
tion and may increase the risk of falls.20,31
VESTIBULAR NEURITIS
Vestibular neuritis, the second most common cause of 
vertigo, is thought to be of viral origin. It most commonly 
affects persons 30 to 50 years of age. Men and women are 
affected equally.Figure 2. Dix-Hallpike  maneuver (used to diagnose benign paroxysmal positional vertigo). This test consists of a series 
of two maneuvers: (A) With the patient sitting on the examination table, facing forward, eyes open, the physician 
turns the patient’s head 45 degrees to the right. (B) The physician supports the patient’s head as the patient lies back 
quickly from a sitting to supine position, ending with the head hanging 20 degrees off the end of the examination 
table. The patient remains in this position for 30 seconds. Then the patient returns to the upright position and is 
observed for 30 seconds. Next, the maneuver is repeated with the patient’s head turned to the left. A positive test is 
indicated if any of these maneuvers trigger vertigo with or without nystagmus. A video of the procedure is available 
at http://www.youtube.com /watch?v=vRpwf2mI3SU.
Reprinted with permission from Swartz R, Longwell P. Treatment of vertigo. Am Fam Physician.  2005;71( 6):1117.
45°
ILLUSTRATIONS BY MARCIA HARTSOCKA BDizzinessFebruary 1, 2017  ◆ Volume 95, Number 3  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  159Vestibular neuritis is diagnosed on the basis of the 
clinical history and physical examination.32 It can cause 
severe rotatory vertigo with nausea and apparent move ­
ment of objects in the visual field (oscillopsia), horizon ­
tally rotating spontaneous nystagmus to the nonaffected 
side, or an abnormal gait with a tendency to fall to the 
affected side. Hearing is not impaired in this condi ­
tion. The Dix­ Hallpike  maneuver is not useful because 
patients with vestibular neuritis do not have episodic 
positionally triggered symptoms.As vestibular compensation occurs, the patient’s vertigo  
resolves slowly over a few days.33 In 50% of patients, 
the underlying nerve damage may take two months to 
resolve.34 However, a sensation of disequilibrium may 
persist for months because of unilateral impairment of  
vestibular function. Vertigo may recur, indicating interfer ­
ence with compensation. If the attacks do not become suc ­
cessively shorter, another diagnosis should be considered.
Reassurance, explanation, and advice are essential, in 
combination with symptomatic treatment for the first Figure 3.  Epley maneuver. (A) The patient sits on the exam -
ination table, with eyes open and head turned 45 degrees 
to the right. (B) The physician supports the patient’s head 
as the patient lies back quickly from a sitting to supine 
position, ending with the head hanging 20 degrees off 
the end of the examination table. (C) The physician turns 
the patient’s head 90 degrees to the left side. The patient 
remains in this position for 30 seconds. (D) The physician 
turns the patient’s head an additional 90 degrees to the 
left while the patient rotates his or her body 90 degrees 
in the same direction. The patient remains in this position 
for 30 seconds. (E) The patient sits up on the left side of 
the examination table. The procedure may be repeated 
on either side until the patient experiences relief of symp -
toms. A video of the procedure is available at http://www.
youtube.com /watch?v=ZqokxZRbJfw&amp;NR=1.
Reprinted with permission from Swartz R, Longwell P. Treatment of vertigo. 
Am Fam Physician . 2005;71( 6):1119.
45°
90°90°ILLUSTRATIONS BY MARCIA HARTSOCKA
B
CD
EDizziness160 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 95, Number 3  ◆ February 1, 2017few days.33 The prognosis is excellent, but development 
of BPPV after an attack of vestibular neuritis may occur 
in 15% of patients.35
Vestibular neuritis is treated with medications and ves ­
tibular rehabilitation20 (Table 320,24). Antiemetics and 
antinausea medications should be used for no more than 
three days because of their effects in blocking central 
compensation. Vertigo and associated nausea or vomit ­
ing can be treated with a combination of antihistamine, 
antiemetic, or benzodiazepine. Although systemic cor ­
ticosteroids have been recommended as a treatment for 
vestibular neuritis, there is insufficient evidence for their 
routine use.36 Antiviral medications are ineffective.37
MENIERE DISEASE
Meniere disease causes vertigo and unilateral hearing 
loss. Although it can develop at any age, it is more com ­
mon between 20 and 60 years.38 The vertigo associated 
with Meniere disease is often severe enough to necessitate 
bed rest and can cause nausea, vomiting, and loss of bal ­
ance. Other symptoms include sudden slips or falls, and 
headache with hearing loss worsened during an attack.39
The underlying pathology is excess endolymphatic 
fluid pressure leading to inner ear dysfunction; how ­
ever, the exact cause is unknown.40 Patients manifest a 
unidirectional, horizontal ­torsional  nystagmus during 
vertigo episodes.
First ­line treatment of Meniere disease involves life ­
style changes, including limiting dietary salt intake to less than 2,000 mg per day, reducing caffeine intake, 
and limiting alcohol to one drink per day. Daily thiazide 
diuretic therapy can be added if vertigo is not controlled 
with lifestyle changes.41
Transtympanic injections of glucocorticoids42 and 
gentamicin43 can improve vertigo. Although transtym ­
panic glucocorticoids may improve hearing, transtym ­
panic gentamicin is associated with hearing loss and 
should be reserved for patients who already have signifi ­
cant hearing loss.20
Vestibular suppressant medications may be used for 
acute attacks.20 Prochlorperazine, promethazine, and 
diazepam (Valium) have been effective. Surgery is an 
option for patients with refractory symptoms.41 Ves ­
tibular exercises may be helpful for patients with uni ­
lateral peripheral vestibular dysfunction.44 Vestibular 
rehabilitation  may be needed for persistent tinnitus or 
hearing loss.
Central Etiologies
The vestibular nuclei, cerebellum, brainstem, spinal 
cord, and vestibular cortex make up the central vestibu ­
lar system. Central abnormalities cause approximately 
25% of dizziness experienced by patients.45 Common 
central etiologies include vestibular migraine and verte ­
brobasilar ischemia. Patients with central pathology may 
present with disequilibrium and ataxia rather than true 
vertigo. However, vertigo can be a presenting symptom 
of an impending cerebrovascular event.46,47Table 3. Vestibular Suppressant Medications 
Medication Dosage Adverse effects Cost*
Antiemetics
Metoclopramide 
(Reglan)5 to 10 mg orally every 
6 hours, or 5 to 10 mg 
slowly IV every 6 hoursAkathesia, atrioventricular block, bradycardia, bronchospasm, 
dizziness, drowsiness, dystonic reaction, gynecomastia, 
nausea, tardive dyskinesiaTablets: $2 ($25)
Prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg orally or IM 
every 6 to 8 hoursAgitation, dizziness, drowsiness, dystonic reaction, extra -
pyramidal symptoms, photosensitivity, tardive dyskinesiaTablets: $2
Antihistamines
Dimenhydrinate 50 mg orally every 6 hours Anorexia, blurred vision, dizziness, drowsiness, nausea $3 
Meclizine 
(Antivert)12.5 to 50 mg orally every  
4 to 8 hoursBlurred vision, drowsiness, fatigue, headache, vomiting $1 to $4 ($8 to $47)
Promethazine 25 mg every 6 hours orally, 
IM, or rectally every 4 to 
12 hoursAgitation, bradycardia, confusion, constipation, drowsiness, 
dizziness, dystonia, extrapyramidal symptoms, gynecomastia, 
photosensitivity, urinary retentionTablets: $2
Suppository: $3
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam 
(Valium)2 to 10 mg orally or IV  
every 4 to 8 hours Amnesia, drowsiness, slurred speech, vertigo Tablets: $1 ($30 to 
$168)
Lorazepam 
(Ativan)1 to 2 mg orally every  
4 hoursAmnesia, dizziness, drowsiness, slurred speech, vertigo $1 ($320 to $500)
IM = intramuscularly; IV = intravenously.
*—Estimated retail price for a three-day  course based on information obtained at http://www.goodrx.com  (accessed October 7, 2016). Generic price 
listed first; brand name in parentheses.
Information from references 20 and 24.DizzinessFebruary 1, 2017  ◆ Volume 95, Number 3  www.aafp.org/afp  American Family Physician  161Potentially deadly central causes of acute vestibular 
syndrome may mimic a more benign peripheral disor ­
der, and a stroke may present with no focal neurologic 
signs. Computed tomography does not have adequate 
sensitivity to distinguish stroke from benign causes of 
acute vestibular syndrome. The HINTS examination 
is highly sensitive and specific in identifying stroke in 
patients with acute vestibular syndrome, and it is supe ­
rior to diffusion ­weighted  magnetic resonance imaging 
in ruling out stroke.6 
VESTIBULAR MIGRAINE
Episodic vertigo in a patient with a history of migraine 
headaches suggests vestibular migraine.48 Vestibular 
migraine is one of the most common causes of episodic 
vertigo among children.49 Among adults, it is three times 
more common among women and more often occurs 
between 20 and 50 years of age.50 A family history of ves ­
tibular migraine is a risk factor.
The diagnostic criteria for vestibular migraine include 
at least five episodes of vestibular symptoms of moder ­
ate or severe intensity lasting five minutes to 72 hours; 
current or previous history of migraine headache; one 
or more migraine features, and at least 50% with ves ­
tibular symptoms; and no other cause of vestibular 
symptoms.51
Initial management focuses on identifying and avoid ­
ing migraine triggers. Stress relief is recommended, and 
adequate sleep and exercise are encouraged. Vestibular 
suppressant medications are helpful.20 Because of a lack 
of well­ designed  randomized clinical trials, preven ­
tion recommendations are based on expert opinion.52 
Preventive medications include anticonvulsants, beta 
adrenergic blockers, calcium channel blockers, tricyclic 
antidepressants, butterbur extract, and magnesium. 
The goal is a 50% reduction in attacks.20 It is not clear 
whether migraine abortive therapy is effective in treat ­
ing vertigo.20
VERTEBROBASILAR ISCHEMIA
The blood supply to the brainstem, cerebellum, and 
inner ear is derived from the vertebrobasilar system. Any 
major branch occlusion can cause vertigo. Diagnosis 
usually relies on a history of brainstem symptoms, such 
as diplopia, dysarthria, weakness, or clumsiness of the 
limbs. Vertigo is the initial symptom in 48% of patients, 
although fewer than one­half  will have an associated 
neurologic finding.53 Treatment includes antiplatelet 
therapy and reduction of risk factors for cerebrovascular 
disease. Warfarin (Coumadin) has been used in cases of 
significant vertebral or basilar artery stenosis.54This article updates a previous article by Post and Dickerson.1
Data Sources : A PubMed and Ovid search was completed in Clinical 
Queries using the key words dizziness, vertigo, disequilibrium, and 
presyncope. Additional search terms included Meniere disease, Epley 
maneuver, and vestibular neuritis. The Cochrane Library and Essential 
Evidence Plus were searched using the key words vertigo and dizziness. 
Last search date: October 2015. 
The Authors
HERBERT L. MUNCIE, MD, is a professor in the Department of Family 
Medicine at Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans.
SUSAN M. SIRMANS, PharmD, is an associate professor in the Department 
of Clinical Sciences at the University of Louisiana at Monroe School of 
Pharmacy.
ERNEST JAMES, MD, is an assistant professor in the Department of Family 
Medicine at Louisiana State University School of Medicine.
Address correspondence to Herbert L. Muncie, MD, LSU School of 
Medicine, 2020 Gravier St., Ste. 746, New Orleans, LA 70112 ( e-mail : 
hmunci@lsuhsc.edu ). Reprints are not available from the authors. 
REFERENCES
 1. Post RE, Dickerson LM. Dizziness:  a diagnostic approach. Am Fam Physi -
cian. 2010;  82(4): 361-368 , 369.
 2. Newman-Toker  DE, Edlow JA. TiTrATE:  a novel, evidence-based  
approach to diagnosing acute dizziness and vertigo. Neurol Clin . 2015; 
33(3):  577-599 , viii.
 3. Newman-Toker  DE, Cannon LM, Stofferahn ME, Rothman RE, Hsieh YH, 
Zee DS. Imprecision in patient reports of dizziness symptom quality:  
a cross-sectional  study conducted in an acute care setting. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 2007;  82(11):  1329-1340 .
 4. Drachman DA, Hart CW. An approach to the dizzy patient. Neurology . 
1972; 22(4):  323-334 .
 5. Bisdorff A, Von Brevern M, Lempert T, Newman-Toker  DE. Classifica -
tion of vestibular symptoms:  towards an international classification of 
vestibular disorders. J Vestib Res . 2009; 19( 1-2): 1-13.
 6. Tarnutzer AA, Berkowitz AL, Robinson KA, Hsieh YH, Newman-Toker  
DE. Does my dizzy patient have a stroke? A systematic review of bedside 
diagnosis in acute vestibular syndrome. CMAJ . 2011;  183 (9):  E571-E592 .
 7. Kerber KA, Newman-Toker  DE. Misdiagnosing dizzy patients. Common 
pitfalls in clinical practice. Neurol Clin . 2015;  33(3):  565-575 , viii.
 8. Newman-Toker  DE, Camargo CA Jr. ‘Cardiogenic vertigo’—true vertigo 
as the presenting manifestation of primary cardiac disease. Nat Clin 
Pract Neurol . 2006;  2(3): 167-172 .
 9. Labuguen RH. Initial evaluation of vertigo [published correction appears 
in Am Fam Physician . 2006;  73(10):  1704]. Am Fam Physician . 2006; 
73(2):  244-251 .
 10. Lopez-Escamez  JA, Carey J, Chung WH, et al.;  Classification Committee 
of the Barany Society;  Japan Society for Equilibrium Research;  European 
Academy of Otology and Neurotology (EAONO);  Equilibrium Com -
mittee of the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head  and Neck 
Surgery ( AAO-HNS );  Korean Balance Society. Diagnostic criteria for 
Menière’s disease. J Vestib Res . 2015;  25(1):  1-7.
 11. Stanton VA, Hsieh YH, Camargo CA Jr, et al. Overreliance on symptom 
quality in diagnosing dizziness:  results of a multicenter survey of emer -
gency physicians [published correction appears in Mayo Clin Proc . 2013; 
88(7):  777]. Mayo Clin Proc . 2007;  82(11):  1319-1328 .
 12. Maarsingh OR, Dros J, Schellevis FG, et al. Causes of persistent dizziness 
in elderly patients in primary care. Ann Fam Med . 2010;  8(3): 196-205 .Dizziness162 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp  Volume 95, Number 3  ◆ February 1, 2017 13. Shoair OA, Nyandege AN, Slattum PW. Medication-related  dizziness in 
the older adult. Otolaryngol Clin North Am . 2011;  44 (2):  455-471 , x.
 14. Lempert T. Recurrent spontaneous attacks of dizziness. Continuum 
(Minneap Minn) . 2012;  18(5 Neuro-otology ): 1086-1101 .
 15. Tinetti ME, Williams CS, Gill TM. Dizziness among older adults:  a pos -
sible geriatric syndrome. Ann Intern Med . 2000;  132(5):  337-344 .
 16. Hoffman RM, Einstadter D, Kroenke K. Evaluating dizziness. Am J Med . 
1999;  107(5):  468-478 .
 17. The Consensus Committee of the American Autonomic Society and the 
American Academy of Neurology. Consensus statement on the defini -
tion of orthostatic hypotension, pure autonomic failure, and multiple 
system atrophy. Neurology . 1996;  46(5):  1470.
 18. Kroenke K, Lucas CA, Rosenberg ML, et al. Causes of persistent diz -
ziness. A prospective study of 100 patients in ambulatory care. Ann 
Intern Med . 1992;  117(11):  898-904 .
 19. Kattah JC, Talkad AV, Wang DZ, Hsieh YH, Newman-Toker  DE. HINTS 
to diagnose stroke in the acute vestibular syndrome:  three-step  bed-
side oculomotor examination more sensitive than early MRI diffusion-
weighted  imaging. Stroke . 2009;  40 (11):  3504-3510 .
 20. Wipperman J. Dizziness and vertigo. Prim Care . 2014;  41(1):  115-131 .
 21. Lee H, Kim HA. Nystagmus in SCA territory cerebellar infarction:  pattern 
and a possible mechanism. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry . 2013;  84(4): 
446-451 .
 22. Newman-Toker  DE, Saber Tehrani AS, Mantokoudis G, et al. Quantita -
tive video-oculography  to help diagnose stroke in acute vertigo and 
dizziness:  toward an ECG for the eyes. Stroke . 2013;  44(4):  1158-1161 .
 23. Strupp M, Fischer C, Hanß L, Bayer O. The takeaway Frenzel goggles:  
a Fresnel-based  device. Neurology . 2014;  83(14):  1241-1245 .
 24. Swartz R, Longwell P. Treatment of vertigo. Am Fam Physician . 2005; 
71(6): 1115-1122 .
 25. Kim JS, Zee DS. Clinical practice. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. 
N Engl J Med . 2014;  370(12):  1138-1147 .
 26. Kroenke K, Hoffman RM, Einstadter D. How common are various causes 
of dizziness? A critical review. South Med J . 2000;  93(2):  160-167 .
 27. Hornibrook J. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV):  history, 
pathophysiology, office treatment and future directions. Int J Otolaryn -
gol. 2011;  2011:  835671.
 28. Parnes LS, Agrawal SK, Atlas J. Diagnosis and management of benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). CMAJ . 2003;  169(7):  681-693 .
 29. Hilton MP, Pinder DK. The Epley (canalith repositioning) manoeuvre 
for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 
2014;  (12): CD003162.
 30. Fife TD, Iverson DJ, Lempert T, et al.;  Quality Standards Subcommit -
tee, American Academy of Neurology. Practice parameter:  therapies 
for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (an evidence-based  review):  
report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Acad -
emy of Neurology. Neurology . 2008; 70(22):  2067-2074 .
 31. Bhattacharyya N, Baugh RF, Orvidas L, et al.;  American Academy of 
Otolaryngology-Head  and Neck Surgery Foundation. Clinical practice 
guideline:  benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg . 2008;  139(5 suppl 4):  S47-S81 .
 32. Kentala E. Characteristics of six otologic diseases involving vertigo. Am 
J Otol . 1996;  17(6):  883-892 .
 33. Rascol O, Hain TC, Brefel C, Benazet M, Clanet M, Montastruc JL. 
Antivertigo medications and drug-induced  vertigo. A pharmacological 
review. Drugs . 1995;  50(5):  777-791 . 34. Bergenius J, Borg E. Audio-vestibular  findings in patients with vestibular 
neuritis. Acta Otolaryngol . 1983;  96(5-6): 389-395 .
 35. Baloh RW, Honrubia V, Jacobson K. Benign positional vertigo:  clinical 
and oculographic features in 240 cases. Neurology . 1987;  37(3): 371-378 .
 36. Fishman JM, Burgess C, Waddell A. Corticosteroids for the treatment of 
idiopathic acute vestibular dysfunction (vestibular neuritis). Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2011;  (5): CD008607.
 37. Strupp M, Zingler VC, Arbusow V, et al. Methylprednisolone, valacy -
clovir, or the combination for vestibular neuritis. N Engl J Med . 2004; 
351(4):  354-361 .
 38. Minor LB, Schessel DA, Carey JP. Ménière’s disease. Curr Opin Neurol . 
2004;  17(1):  9-16.
 39. Kentala E. Characteristics of six otologic diseases involving vertigo. Am 
J Otol . 1996;  17(6):  883-892 .
 40. Coelho DH, Lalwani AK. Medical management of Ménière’s disease. 
Laryngoscope . 2008;  118 (6):  1099-1108 .
 41. Harcourt J, Barraclough K, Bronstein AM. Meniere’s disease. BMJ. 2014; 
349: g6544.
 42. Garduño-Anaya  MA, Couthino De Toledo H, Hinojosa-González  R, 
Pane-Pianese  C, Ríos-Castañeda  LC. Dexamethasone inner ear perfu -
sion by intratympanic injection in unilateral Ménière’s disease:  a two-
year prospective, placebo-controlled , double-blind , randomized trial. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2005;  133(2):  285-294 .
 43. Postema RJ, Kingma CM, Wit HP, Albers FW, Van Der Laan BF. Intratym -
panic gentamicin therapy for control of vertigo in unilateral Menière’s 
disease:   a prospective, double-blind , randomized, placebo-controlled  
trial. Acta Otolaryngol . 2008;  128(8):  876-880 .
 44. Hillier SL, McDonnell M. Vestibular rehabilitation for unilateral periph -
eral vestibular dysfunction. Clin Otolaryngol . 2011;  36 (3):  248-249 .
 45. Neuhauser HK. Epidemiology of vertigo. Curr Opin Neurol . 2007;  20(1):  
40-46 .
 46. Lee H, Sohn SI, Cho YW, et al. Cerebellar infarction presenting isolated 
vertigo:  frequency and vascular topographical patterns. Neurology . 
2006;  67(7): 1178-1183 .
 47. Paul NL, Simoni M, Rothwell PM;  Oxford Vascular Study. Transient 
isolated brainstem symptoms preceding posterior circulation stroke:   
a population-based  study. Lancet Neurol . 2013;  12(1):  65-71 .
 48. Lempert T. Vestibular migraine. Semin Neurol . 2013;  33(3):  212-218 .
 49. Langhagen T, Lehrer N, Borggraefe I, Heinen F, Jahn K. Vestibular 
migraine in children and adolescents:  clinical findings and laboratory 
tests. Front Neurol . 2015;  5: 292.
 50. Cherchi M, Hain TC. Migraine-associated  vertigo. Otolaryngol Clin 
North Am . 2011;  44(2): 367-375 .
 51. Lempert T, Olesen J, Furman J, et al. Vestibular migraine:  diagnostic 
criteria. J Vestib Res . 2012; 22(4):  167-172 .
 52. Maldonado Fernández M, Birdi JS, Irving GJ, Murdin L, Kivekäs I, Strupp 
M. Pharmacological agents for the prevention of vestibular migraine. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2015;  (6): CD010600.
 53. Newman-Toker  DE, Kattah JC, Alvernia JE, Wang DZ. Normal head 
impulse test differentiates acute cerebellar strokes from vestibular neu -
ritis. Neurology . 2008;  70(24 pt 2):  2378-2385 .
 54. Gomez CR, Cruz-Flores  S, Malkoff MD, Sauer CM, Burch CM. Isolated 
vertigo as a manifestation of vertebrobasilar ischemia. Neurology . 
1996;  47(1): 94-97 .