Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine
Medical Microbiology and Immunology
Ne uro mus c ular Bloc k
Immunology on the Brain
Stephen Jones , PhDImmunology on the Brain
Learning Objectives
1.Appraise the role of microglial cells in the initiation 
of the immune response in the brain.
2.Describe the mechanisms by which microglial cells 
contribute to the immune response.
3.Appraise the significance of the repertoire of 
receptors and soluble mediators 
expressed/produced by the microglial cells
4.Appraise the roll of the blood brain barrier in the 
control of inflammation in the brain.
5.Describe the molecular interactions involved in 
leukocyte recruitment to the CNS. 
6.Compare and contrast the immunological 
mechanisms of the antibacterial versus antiviral 
immune response.
7.List the principal mediators of immunity mounted 
against bacteria (extra- and intracellular), viruses, 
fungi and parasites.Reading Assignment
Suggested:
Abbas, Cellular and Molecular 
Imunology.  6th Ed.  Chapter 15 
Immunity to MicrobesThe brain has long been considered to 
be an Immunologically privileged site
•Immunologically privileged sites are tissues 
where immune responses generally fail to 
occur and include the eye, brain and the 
testis. 
•What features of the brain restrict 
immunological activity?
–The brain lacks a classical lymphatic system to 
collect antigen.
–Scarcity of dendritic cells
–The blood brain barrier (BBB) effectively limits 
the lymphocyte egress from the blood into the 
brain, and blocks the passage of soluble factors 
and plasma proteins. However, more recent discoveries reveal 
that the brain is quite immunologically 
active! 
The plan:
1.What is the brain’s resident immune 
cell population.
2.Leukocyte recruitment to the brain: the 
barrier function of the blood brain 
barrier, and the mechanisms of 
immune cell recruitment to the brain.
3. The brain immune response during an 
infection.Cells of the Central 
Nervous System
Microglia: resident immune 
cell population of the CNS
Microglia: resident immune 
cell population of the CNS
•Classified according to their morphology into 
three types:
Resting: found in the healthy adult brain,characterized by a
small cell body with fine, ramified processes.  
Activated:  can become activated by CNS infection, injury 
or
neurodegenerative disease.
Amoeboid phagocytic cells: once activated these cells take
on the roll of immunological mediator, with the capacity to
produce cytokines, phagocytose, and process and present
antigen.  A closer look at the 
immunological roll of the 
activated microglial cell
Microglial cells express TLRs and are the innate
sentinels for DANGER in the CNS.  Once 
activated
they carry out the following functions:
I.Cytokine secretion : fully activated microglial cells
secrete IL-1, IL-6, TNF , as well as chemokines for 
macrophage and lymphocyte recruitment (MCP-1, 
MIP-1, and RANTES).
What effect would these cytokines have on the local
endothelial cells of the BBB?  
Proinflammatory cytokines decrease the stringency of the BBB, 
by allowing entry of soluble factors and peripheral immune 
cells, 
including macs, NK cells, and lymphocytes. II. Phagocytosis and cytotoxicity:  upon activation 
microglia 
upregulate complement receptors and Fc receptors for
IgG antibodies (Fc  receptors).  
What is the functional result of the expression of these 
molecules?   
Activated microglia have enhanced 
phagocytic activity by binding to opsonizing 
complement and Ig. 
Microglia also release superoxide radicals 
and NO directly into the microenvironment in 
response to pathogens and cytokine stimulation. A closer look at the immunological 
roll of the activated microglial cellIII.Antigen processing and presentation: resting 
microglia express little MHC class I or II.
Activation causes a robust increased in MHC and
costimulatory molecule expression, such as CD80, CD86
(B7-1, -2), and CD40.
Increased MHC, CD80, and CD86 expression will allow 
for greater activation of…..
Increased CD40 expression will allow for….A closer look at the 
immunological roll of the 
activated microglial cellIn addition to promoting immunity and inflammation
microglia also play a regulatory roll in controlling 
immune 
responses in the CNS.  This is accomplished by:
 
1. Their expression of FasL.
How does microglia expression of FasL 
regulate the CNS immune response?
2. Their production of IL-10.
How does microglia production of IL-10 regulate 
the CNS immune response?A closer look at the immunological 
roll of the activated microglial cellMicroglia: Receptors and Secreted 
Factors
Molecule Class Examples Function
Scavenger receptors CD36 Uptake of apoptotic 
cells
Ig Receptors
Complement receptorsFcg RI
CR3Uptake of opsonized 
particles
Growth factor receptor M-CSF R, GM-CSF 
RProliferation and 
survival
TLR TLR1-9 Pathogen and 
damage associated 
activation
Antigen presenting 
moleculesMHC II Presentation of 
phagocytosed 
material
Cytokines TNF, IL-6, IL10, 
M-CSFImmune activation, 
and regulationThe plan:
1.What is the brain’s resident immune 
cell population.
2.Leukocyte recruitment to the brain: the 
barrier function of the blood brain 
barrier, and the mechanisms of 
immune cell recruitment to the brain.
3. The brain immune response during an 
infection.Leukocytes recruited to the CNS must first 
pass through either the blood-CSF barrier 
or the Blood Brain Barrier (BBB)
What is the Blood Brain Barrier?
•Structural and functional barrier which 
impedes and regulates the influx of most 
compounds from blood to brain, and 
minimizes lymphocyte migration through 
the brain. 
•Formed by brain microvascular endothelial 
cells (BMEC), astrocyte end feet and 
pericytes.
•Essential for normal function of CNS, 
responsible for some metabolic activities 
(such as the metabolism of L-dopa to 
regulate its concentration in the brain.)Structure of Blood Brain 
Barrier
Source: Int J Parasitol. 2006 May 1;36:541-546The BBB is formed by the vascular 
endothelium within the CNS 
parenchyma.  The endothelial 
cells are surrounded by a basal 
membrane, pericytes, and astrocytic 
end feet, with microglia also in close 
attendance.
As seen earlier, microglia can secrete 
inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, 6 
and TNF that act to increase BBB 
permeability, thus promoting 
recruitment.Lymphocytes recruited to the 
CNS must first pass through the 
Blood Brain Barrier
•Under normal physiological conditions, activated 
lymphocytes enter the CNS to undertake 
immune-surveillance.
•However, during bacterial or viral infection, or 
inflammatory conditions, large numbers of 
circulating lymphocytes cross the BBB and gain 
access to the CNS.Mechanisms of activated T cell 
entry to the CNS
•The initiating event here must be T cell 
activation in a draining lymph node.
•Following activation, the T cell down-regulates 
those molecules that initially directed it to the 
lymph node (remember CCR7?  CD62L?),
•and upregulates the adhesion molecules and 
chemokine receptors that are required to 
direct the activated cell to infected tissue.Recall the 4 main steps of leukocyte trans-endothelial migration: 
selectin-mediated low affinity contact, chemokine signaling, 
expression of high affinity integrins, firm adhesion and extravasation.
Molecules to remember:
•E, P selectin, selectin ligands
mediate weak adhesion, 
induces rolling.
•Chemokines induce high affinity
LFA-1, VLA-4 on lymphocytes 
which interact with ICAM-1, 
VCAM-1, mediating firm adhesion.
•Lymphocyte follows chemokine 
gradient to infection. The plan:
1.What is the brain’s resident immune 
cell population.
2.Leukocyte recruitment to the brain: the 
barrier function of the blood brain 
barrier, and the mechanisms of 
immune cell recruitment to the brain.
3. The brain immune response during an 
infection.What is the result of these 
mechanisms during the response to 
an infection?   
•The response to invading viruses is reflected by an increase in 
lymphocytes, mostly T cells, and monocytes in the CSF.
–In general, the CSF remains clear during viral infection.  This 
condition is termed 'aseptic' meningitis.
• The response to pyogenic bacteria shows a more spectacular 
and rapid increase in polymorphonuclear leukocytes so that 
the CSF becomes visibly turbid. This condition is termed 
'septic' meningitis. Depending upon the infection, the immune response 
itself can be a mediator of neuronal injury.   
•Viruses induce perivascular infiltration of lymphocytes and monocytes, sometimes, 
as 
in the case of polio, with 
direct damage to infected 
cells.
–Infiltrating B cells 
produce antibody to the
invading microorganism, 
and T cells react with 
microbial antigens to 
release cytokines that 
attract and activate other
 T cells and macrophages. 
Mechanisms of neuronal damage during
a CNS viral infection.
Immunology 129, 154-169.In all cases, a degree of inflammation and
edema that would be trivial in striated muscle,
skin or liver may be life-threatening when it
occurs in the vulnerable 'closed box' 
containing
the brain and spinal cord.Immunology 129, 154-169.Specific immune responses to microorganisms: an overview
Importance of antimicrobial defenses for 
Infectious agents
Bacteria Intracellular 
BacteriaViruses Fungi Parasites
Complement + - - - -
Interferon /- - ++++ - -
Neutrophils ++++ - - + +
Macrophages ++ +++ ++ ++ +
NK cells - - +++ - -
CD4 TH1 - ++ +++ + +
CD8 CTL - ++ ++++ - -
Antibody ++ + + + ++ (IgE)Antibacterial responses. First, innate antigen-nonspecific responses attract and promote 
polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) and macrophage (M) responses. Dendritic cells (DC) and 
antigen reach the lymph node to activate early immune responses (note Th1 vs Th2 
regulation)  Later, memory cells are developed. The time course of events is indicated at the 
top of the figure.Antiviral responses. The response to a virus (e.g., influenza virus) initiates with 
interferon production and action and NK cells. Activation of antigen-specific 
immunity resembles the antibacterial response, except that CD8 cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes (CTLs) are important antiviral responses. The time course of 
events is indicated at the top of the figure.
•IgM is produced day d. 3
of prim. Infection.
•IgG and IgA are found 
2-3 days after IgM.
•Activated CD8 T cells 
move right  to the site of 
infection and kill virally
infected cells.
•Protection from reinfection
provided by circulating Ab..
And the rapid response of 
memory B and T cells. Learning Objectives
1.Appraise the roll of microglial cells in the initiation of the 
immune response in the brain.
2.Describe the mechanisms by which microglial cells contribute to 
the immune response.
3.Appraise the significance of the repertoire of receptors and 
soluble mediators expressed/produced by the microglial cells
4.Appraise the roll of the blood brain barrier in the control of 
inflammation in the brain.
5.Describe the molecular interactions involved in leukocyte 
recruitment to the CNS. 
6.Compare and contrast the immunological mechanisms of the 
antibacterial versus antiviral immune response.
7.List the principal mediators of immunity mounted against 
bacteria (extra- and intracellular), viruses, fungi and parasites.