Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine
Medical Microbiology and Immunology
MMI: Neuromuscular Block 
Multiple Sclerosis and Guillian Barre’ Syndrome
MS-Perivascular lymphocytes
 in an active MS plaque.MS plaque. Normal myelin stains
deep blue.Learning Objectives
    1. To describe the immunopathogenesis of 
Multiple Sclerosis and Guillain-Barre 
syndrome.                                                           
   2. To describe the basic 
immunopathogenic mechanisms of 
disease.                                             
    3. To relate clinical manifestation, testing 
and diagnosis and treatment to the 
mechanism of disease.
    4. To discuss factors that influence 
susceptibility to autoimmune disease.
                                                            Reading Assignment
Recommended:
Essentials of Clinical Immunology,  
Ch. 17
Robin’s Ch. 28Demyelinating Diseases
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) – 
Clinical Features
•An autoimmune demyelinating disorder 
characterized by distinct episodes of neurologic 
deficits.
•MS is the most common of the demyelinating 
disorders, having a prevalence of 
approximately 1 per 1,000 persons in most of 
the United States and Europe. 
•Disease can occur at any age, although onset in 
childhood or after the age of 50 is rare.
 
•Women are affected twice as often as are men. Multiple Sclerosis (MS) – 
Clinical FeaturesAreas affected by MS and 
associated clinical deficits:
Central Nervous System
–Brain stem – produces cranial nerve 
signs, ataxia,  and nystagmus
–Spinal cord – motor and sensory 
impairment of trunk and limbs, 
spasticity, and voluntary control of 
bladder function.
–Optic nerves – unilateral visual 
impairment is a common initial 
manifestation.Initial Presentation 
of MS
Other Common Symptoms 
of MS
•Fatigue
•Muscle spasms
•Sexual dysfunction
•Cognitive impairment
–Generally occurs later in the diseaseThe central role of the immune system 
in the pathogenesis of MS is supported 
by multiple lines of evidence.
The central role of the immune system in the 
pathogenesis of MS is supported by multiple lines 
of evidence.Mice sensitized against myelin antigens 
develop an MS-like disease 
characterized, in part, by paralysis. 
Mouse strains that produce greater amounts of Th2
 cytokines are more resistant to MS.What was the role of complete Freund’s adjuvant 
in the EAE model?
•Myelin Basic Protein injected alone will be processed and 
presented to T cells, BUT! there are no microbial compounds or 
inflammatory cytokines around to drive inflammation and the 
expression of APC costimulatory molecules, thus preventing the 
full activation of T cells.
•Complete freund’s adjuvant (CFA) is loaded with microbial 
compounds, which activate antigen-baring  APCs to express 
CD80/CD86 and inflammatory cytokines, therefore, providing
the strong costimulation necessary for a fully activated T cell 
response.
 Antigen/CFA
emulsion.MS is caused by an autoimmune response directed 
against the components of the myelin sheath.
    
 Autoreactive Th1/Th17 CD4 T cells recruit/activate 
inflammatory mediators.
IL-12
IFNIL-23
TGF-, 
IL-6
IL-1
IL-2, IFNIL-17
Help CD8 
autoimmune
responseHelp activate 
Autoreactive 
B cellsActivate 
macs,
microglial
cellsRecruit
neutrophils,
monocytesEffector T cell DifferentiationComponents of the autoimmune response in MS:
After clonal expansion, T and B cells infiltrate the CNS: 
Clonally expanded B cells mature to plasma cells and release large amounts of IgG, which
may bind soluble or membrane-bound antigen.  Role of the Ab suspected, but undefined.
CD4+ T cells are activated by 
self antigen presented by 
microglial cells.  
TH1 IFNγ activates microglial cells 
and recruited macrophages, 
TH17cells promote the recruitment 
of neutrophils/monos.  Inflammation
caused by inflammatory mediators
results in damage to myelin
sheath. 
How Is MS Diagnosed?
Oligoclonal bands of IgG detected in CSF
by isoelectric focusing. 
Myelin–provides 
insulation to nerve 
processes (axons)Blood vessel
Blood vessel
Blood vesselInflammation
Inflammation
Inflammation
Myelin–provides 
insulation to nerve 
processes (axons)Blood vessel
Blood vessel
Blood vesselBlood vessel
Blood vessel
Blood vesselInflammation
Inflammation
InflammationInflammation
Inflammation
Inflammation
Destruction of myelin sheath: disruption of nerve impulse conduction.End result of inflammatory process is 
demyelination:Multiple aspects of the immune response 
contribute to autoimmunity!What predisposes to MS?
•Faulty Tregs?
•Genetics
•Environmental factors
•Infectious historyFaulty TRegs
Defective suppressor 
function may lead to
increased autoimmunity.
Polymorphism in gene for 
IL-2 receptor is a risk factor 
for MS.  Related to faulty 
TREG function?  TGF- TGF-Genetics
Up to 19% of patients have an affected relative
Environment, Genetics, Infectious 
Disease?
High/Probably
High Prevalance
Low/Probably
Low PrevalancePostulated role of infections in 
autoimmunity
•Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) has been implicated in MS pathogenesis.
•A pentapeptide sequence of EBV nuclear antigen is homologous with a 
myelin basic protein epitope = molecular mimicry.Treatment?
The egress of naïve and activated T cells 
from the lymph node is controlled by the 
expression of receptors for S1P.Treatment?
Guillain-Barre’ Syndrome
Pathophysiology
Pathophysiology
•There has been no consistent demonstration of 
an infectious agent in peripheral nerves in these 
patients, and an immunological reaction is now 
generally favored as the underlying cause (rather 
than the infection alone causing the pathology).•Drug Saf. 2009;32(4):309-23. doi: 10.2165/00002018-200932040-00005.
•Vaccines and Guillain-Barré syndrome.
•Strongest evidence for causal relationship between vaccine and GBS: 
–The evidence for a causal association is strongest for the swine influenza vaccine that was used in 
1976-77. Studies of influenza vaccines used in subsequent years, however, have found small or no 
increased risk of GBS. 
–Older formulations of rabies vaccine cultured in mammalian brain tissues have been found to 
have an increased risk of GBS, but newer formulations of rabies vaccine, derived from chick 
embryo cells, do not appear to be associated with GBS at a greater than expected rate. 
•In an earlier review, the Institute of Medicine concluded that the evidence favoured a causal 
association between oral polio vaccine and tetanus toxoid-containing vaccines and GBS. However, 
recent evidence from large epidemiological studies and mass immunization campaigns in different 
countries found no correlation between oral polio vaccine or tetanus toxoid-containing vaccines and 
GBS. 
•Spontaneous reports to the US Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System shortly after the introduction 
of quadrivalent conjugated meningococcal vaccine (MCV4) raised concerns of a possible association 
with GBS. Comparisons with expected rates of GBS, however, were inconclusive for an increased risk,
•There are certain circumstances in which immunizing individuals, particularly those with a prior history 
of GBS, may require caution. However, the benefit of vaccines in preventing disease and decreasing 
morbidity and mortality, particularly for influenza, needs to be weighed against the potential risk of 
GBS.•Drug Saf. 2009;32(4):309-23. doi: 10.2165/00002018-200932040-00005.
•Vaccines and Guillain-Barré syndrome.
•Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is the leading cause of acute flaccid paralysis in developed 
countries and it is broadly believed that immune stimulation plays a role in its pathogenesis. 
•The objective of this article is to review the current body of evidence that either supports or does 
not support a causal, rather than just temporal, association between various vaccines and GBS, 
and to provide an evidence-based review of this issue. 
•The scope of the article includes published reports that, regardless of method of case 
ascertainment, appeared in peer-reviewed literature between 1950 and 2008. 
•Our review indicates that, with rare exceptions, associations between vaccines and GBS have 
been only temporal. 
•There are certain circumstances in which immunizing individuals, particularly those with a prior 
history of GBS, may require caution. However, the benefit of vaccines in preventing disease and 
decreasing morbidity and mortality, particularly for influenza, needs to be weighed against the 
potential risk of GBS.PathophysiologyTreatment
•With improved supporting respiratory care most 
patients improve within a few weeks of disease 
onset, and drug therapy is not necessary.
–Treatment with corticosteroids does not improve outcomes 
and their use is no longer advocated.
•Large doses of IVIG and plasmapheresis can be helpful 
supporting a role for Abs in the pathology of the 
disease.Learning Objectives
    1. To describe the immunopathogenesis of 
Multiple Sclerosis and Guillain-Barre 
syndrome.                                                           
   2. To describe the basic 
immunopathogenic mechanisms of 
disease.                                             
    3. To relate clinical manifestation, testing 
and diagnosis and treatment to the 
mechanism of disease.
    4. To discuss factors that influence 
susceptibility to autoimmune disease.
                                                            