Immunologically Mediated 
Diseases of the 
Neuromuscular Junction
MMI2 Neuromuscular Block
Stephen Jones Ph.D.Learning Objectives
1.To discuss the immunopathogenic mechanisms of myathenia 
gravis, LEMS and Stiff man syndrome.                                                      
                       
2.To recall the autoimmune targets and be able to relate this to the 
development of clinical disease.                                                  
3.To relate clinical testing and treatment to the mechanism of 
disease. 
4.To compare and contrast the etiology and imunopath of the 
different noninfectious inflammatory myopathies.Learning Objectives
1.To discuss the immunopathogenic mechanisms of myathenia 
gravis, LEMS and Stiff man syndrome.                                                      
                       
2.To recall the autoimmune targets and be able to relate this to the 
development of clinical disease.                                                  
3.To relate clinical testing and treatment to the mechanism of 
disease. 
4.To compare and contrast the etiology, imunopath, and treatment 
of the different noninfectious inflammatory myopathies.Reading Assignment
•Required:
•Robbins, Ch. 27
•Essentials of Clinical Immunology, 
Ch. 17Myasthenia GravisLets consider this case:
•Mr. Weld is a 71 year old retired 
engineer.  
•He developed  double vision 
(diplopia) which gradually 
worsened over the course of 4 
months and caused him to seek 
medical attention.
•On examination, the doctor 
noticed that Mr. Weld had ptosis 
of both eyelids, so that they 
covered the upper third of the 
irises of his eyes.Case study:
•When the doctor asked Mr. Weld to 
look to the right and then to the left, 
he noticed limitations in the ocular 
movement of the eye.
•The patient admitted to tiredness 
and fatigue in the arms and legs on 
exercise, which recovered with 
resting.
•A radiologic examination of the chest 
was performed and it was normal, 
thymus gland was of normal size for 
his age.
•Blood tests revealed the presence of 
antibodies to the acetylcholine 
receptor.What is the most likely diagnosis for this patient?
•This patient’s condition is 
Myasthenia Gravis , 
characterized by weakness and 
fatigue of voluntary muscles, 
including those of the eye.In myasthenia gravis the loss of muscle function results from 
impaired transmission of motor impulses from nerve to 
muscle as a result of antibodies that inhibit key 
neuromuscular junction proteins. 
•Autoantibodies involved:
-85% of patients have autoAbs against 
post-synaptic acetylcholine receptors
-The remaining patients are found to 
have Abs against the sarcolemmal 
protein muscle-specific receptor 
tyrosine kinase .  Patients with these 
Abs tend to experience more focal 
muscle involvement (neck, shoulder, 
facial, respiratory, and bulbar muscles).In myasthenia gravis the loss of muscle function results from 
impaired transmission of motor impulses from nerve to 
muscle as a result of autoantibodies that inhibit key 
neuromuscular junction proteins. The autoantibodies lead to the loss of functional AChRs 
through 3 possible mechanisms: 
Autoantibodies Mechanism of pathogenesis 
Anti-Acetylcholine Receptor 
(AChR)Cross-link AChR, thereby 
increasing their internalization 
and degradation.
Anti-Acetylcholine Receptor 
(AChR)Activate the classical 
complement pathway which 
causes direct injury to the post-
synaptic membrane.  
Anti-muscle specific receptor 
tyrosine kinaseInterfere with trafficking and 
cluster of AChR within the 
sarcolemmal membrane, 
resulting in decreased AChR 
function.  (These Abs do not fix 
complement.)The classical complement pathway.  Note C1 binding 
to the bound antibody molecules, eventually leading 
to
MAC formation.What was the point of the radiological 
examination of Mr. Weld’s chest? 
•There is strong association between 
pathogenic anti-AChR autoAbs and thymic 
abnormalities: 
•10-15% of MG cases occur with thymoma 
(a tumor of thymic epithelial cells)
•An additional 30% of patients 
(particularly in the young) are found to 
have thymic hyperplasia, marked by the 
appearance of B cell follicles in the 
thymus.
•In cases of thymic hyperplasia or thymoma, 
thymectomy is often an effective treatment.  What was the point of the radiological 
examination of Mr. Weld’s chest? 
•What is the link here between the 
production of autoreactive antibody and 
thymic abnormalities?
•Myoid cells (striated muscle cells in the 
thymus) contain AChr and may be a source 
of autoantigen to stimulate an 
autoreactive response. 
•The thymoma and hyperplasia may disrupt 
normal thymic selection processes in a 
manner that promote autoimmunity.
•The thymus of MG patients has been 
found to contain germinal center  B cells 
and plasma cells that are at least one 
source of  the autoreactive Ab directed 
against the AChR.What was the point of the radiological 
examination of Mr. Weld’s chest? 
•Mr. Weld’s thymus was normal.
• Note that abnormalities of the 
thymus are not observed in 
older patients, and thymectomy 
does not usually help them. Case study:
•Mr Weld was told to take 
pyridostigmine, an inhibitor of 
Acetylcholinecholinesterase.
•Mr Weld’s vision steadily 
improved, but he developed 
diarrhea from the pyridostigmine, 
and this limited the amount he 
could take. How did the cholinesterase inhibitor work to 
improve the patient’s condition?
•By blocking cholinesterase, you 
prolong the biological half life of 
acetylcholine , thereby increasing its 
concentration in the neuromuscular 
junction, and the likelihood and 
engaging the remaining ACHr
•What about the drug treatment 
caused the diarrhea? 
•The amount of acetylcholine in the 
intestine is raised by the drug.  In 
the intestine acetylcholine binds to 
muscarinic receptors and increases 
intestinal motilityCase study:
•Three years later…
•Mr Weld developed a severe 
respiratory infection.  
•Soon after the infection his ptosis 
became so severe that he had to lift 
his eyelids by taping them with 
adhesive tape.  His speech became 
indistinct, and he had difficulty 
chewing an swallowing food.  In 
addition, he now had weakness of his 
facial muscles and his tongue.
•Mr Weld was admitted to the 
hospital and treated with 
azathioprine.  Thereafter, he showed 
steady improvement.Why might the respiratory infection have triggered 
the severe manifestations of the disease? 
•B cells already primed to 
produce autoantibody may be 
stimulated by the inflammation 
caused by the infection or have 
received help from nearby T 
cells activated by the infection.
•Pathogens induce increased 
expression of MHC and 
costimulatory molecules, also 
potentially promoting 
autoimmunity.What did the azathioprine do?  Are there any potential 
concerns about the prolonged use of this drug?
•Azathioprine works by 
inhibiting DNA synthesis , thus 
the growth of rapidly dividing 
cells such as T and B cells is 
suppressed, resulting in reduced 
autoimmunity
•The down side: responses to 
infections are also suppressed, 
resulting in increased ID 
susceptibility.Other therapy options?
•Plasmapheresis (removal or 
filtering of the plasma) can be 
used to reduce levels of circulating 
autoantibodies.
•This involves taking blood 
separating off the plasma and 
returning the red cell enriched 
fraction to the patient. 
•Thymectomy  for those with an 
enlarged thymus or thymoma.
•Intravenous Ig (IVIG) as an 
immunomodulatory agent for the 
treatment of autoimmune diseaseExact mechanism of action for IVIG: not known for sure.
A schematic representation of the proposed mechanisms of action of intravenous 
immunoglobulin
Nature Clinical Practice Rheumatology (2007) 3, 262-272Exact mechanism of action for IVIG: not known for sure.
•One hypothesis:
•FcRn normally recycles 
IgG, providing increased 
half life for IgG.
•High dose IVIG may bind 
up all of the FcRn, blocking 
recycling of endogenous 
Ab (which includes the 
autoreactive stuff) thus 
lowering titers of 
autoreactive antibody.What components of the immune system would you expect to 
have lost tolerance in someone with MG, or a similar Ab 
mediated autoimmune disease? 
Myasthenia Gravis: general features
•Recognized as one of the best-
defined forms of autoimmune 
disease 
•Myasthenia gravis is a muscle 
disease caused by immune-
mediated loss of acetylcholine 
receptors 
•The disease has a prevalence of 
about 3 in 100,000 persons.
•When arising before age 40 years, 
it is most commonly seen in 
women, but there is equal 
occurrence between the sexes in 
older patients. Myasthenia Gravis: general features
•Thymic abnormalities, including 
hyperplasia and thymoma are a 
common feature of this disease. 
•Analysis of neuromuscular 
transmission in myasthenia 
gravis shows a decrease in the 
number of muscle acetylcholine 
receptors (AChRs), and 
circulating antibodies to the 
AChR are present in most 
patients, the remaining have 
Abs against muscle specific 
receptor tyrosine kinase.Myasthenia Gravis: general features
•Mr. Weld suffered from the oculobulbar 
form of the disease, b/c it principally 
involves the cells of the eye.  
•In younger people the disease is much 
more severe, and the Ab titers to the 
AchR receptor are higher .  This severe 
form of the disease can lead to death if 
breathing is impaired.
•Disease in young people is often 
associated with enlargement of the 
thymus gland .  Removal, leads to a 
rapid improvement.Myasthenia Gravis: general features
•Genetic susceptibility? HLA-B8, 
HLA-DR3
•Can be transferred from mom to 
fetus.  Ab isotype responsible?
•Symptoms disappear as maternal Ab 
titers decline.Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a disease of 
the neuromuscular junction that is distinct from myasthenia 
gravis.
•Features of LEMS:
•It usually develops as a paraneoplastic 
process, most commonly with small cell 
carcinoma of the lung (60% of cases), 
although it can occur in the absence of 
underlying malignant disease.
•Patients develop proximal muscle weakness 
along with autonomic dysfunction. 
•Unlike in myasthemia gravis, NO clinical 
improvement is found upon administration 
of anticholinesterase agents , and 
electrophysiologic studies show evidence of 
enhanced neurotransmission with repetitive 
stimulation . These clinical features allow this 
disorder to be distinguished from 
myasthenia gravis. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS)
•Pathophysiology of LEMS:
•The content of acetylcholine is normal in 
the neuromuscular junction synaptic 
vesicles, and the postsynaptic membrane 
is normally responsive to acetylcholine.
• BUT, fewer vesicles are released in 
response to each presynaptic action 
potential. 
•100% of patients have antibodies that 
recognize presynaptic PQ-type voltage-
gated calcium channels , and a similar 
disease can be transferred to animals 
with these antibodies.
•Ab bind to calcium channels, inhibiting 
polarization of nerve membrane and the 
release of acetylcholine .Impaired transmission from nerve to muscle at the neuromuscular 
junction in MG and other muscle-endplate diseases.
In Stiff man syndrome, Abs 
against the intracellular enzyme 
glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD) result in inability to relax 
muscles  by breaking down 
neurotransmitter.
Always associated with type I 
diabetes mellitus. 
Noninfectious inflammatory myopathies:
•are a heterogeneous group of disorders 
that are most likely immune mediated 
and are characterized by injury and 
inflammation of skeletal muscle. 
•Three relatively distinct disorders 
dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and 
inclusion body myositis , are included in 
this category.
•These may occur as an isolated 
myopathy or as one component of an 
immune-mediated systemic disease, 
particularly systemic sclerosis.Dermatomyositis
•Individuals with dermatomyositis have an 
inflammatory disorder of the skin and skeletal 
muscle.
• It is characterized by a distinctive skin rash that 
may accompany or precede the onset of muscle 
disease. The classic rash takes the form of a lilac 
or heliotrope discoloration of the upper eyelids 
associated with periorbital edema. It is often 
accompanied by a scaling erythematous eruption 
or dusky red patches over the knuckles, elbows, 
and knees (Grotton lesions). 
•Muscle weakness is slow in onset, bilaterally 
symmetric, and often accompanied by myalgias. It 
typically affects the proximal muscles first . As a 
result, tasks such as getting up from a chair and 
climbing steps become increasingly difficult. Fine 
movements controlled by distal muscles are 
affected only late in the disease. 
•Extramuscular manifestations, including 
interstitial lung disease, vasculitis, and 
myocarditis, may be present in some casesPolymyositis
•This inflammatory myopathy is 
characterized by symmetric 
proximal muscle involvement, 
similar to that seen in 
dermatomyositis. It differs from 
dermatomyositis by the lack of 
cutaneous involvement and its 
occurrence mainly in adults. 
•Similar to dermatomyositis, there 
may be inflammatory involvement 
of heart, lungs, and blood vessels. Inclusion body myositis
•Begins with the involvement of distal 
muscles, especially extensors of the knee 
(quadriceps) and flexors of the wrists 
and fingers. 
•Furthermore, the weakness may be 
asymmetric. 
•It is an insidiously developing disorder 
that typically affects individuals over the 
age of 50 years. 
•Most cases are sporadic, but familial 
cases have been recognized as "inclusion 
body myopathy." Noninfectious inflammatory myopathies: 
Etiology and Pathogenesis
•Dermatomyositis : Capillaries seem to be the 
principal immunological target, where deposits of 
antibodies and complement (MAC) are present in 
small blood vessels, and are associated with foci 
of myocyte necrosis. 
•Various Abs are often detected and tend to be 
associated with specific clinical features (although 
no confirmed pathogenic role has been 
discovered):
•Anti-M2 Abs – (directed against a helicase 
anzyme) are associated with prominent Gottron 
papules and heliotrope rash.
•Anti-Jo1 – (directed against the enzyme histidyl t-
RNA synthetase) are associated with interstitial 
lung disease, nonerosive arthritis, and a skin rash 
described as mechanics hands. 
•Anti-P115-P140  (directed against several 
transcriptional regulators) are associated with 
paraneoplastic and juvenile cases of 
dermatomyositis. Noninfectious inflammatory myopathies: 
Etiology and Pathogenesis
•Polymyositis  seems to be caused by cell-
mediated injury of myocytes.  CD8+ 
cytotoxic T cells and macrophages are 
seen near damaged muscle fibers, and 
the expression of HLA class I and class II 
molecules is increased on the 
sarcolemma of normal fibers.  Vascular 
injury is noth thought to play  major role 
in ploymyositis. 
•Inclusion body myositis seems to have 
less clear immunological pathology. As in 
polymyositis, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells are 
found in the muscle, but in contrast to 
the other two forms of myositis, 
immunosuppressive therapy is not 
beneficial.Noninfectious inflammatory myopathies: 
Treatment
•Corticosteroids are first line 
treatment for polymyositis and 
dermatomyositis.
•In steroid resistant cases , 
immunosuppressive drugs such as 
azathioprine or methotrexate are 
used.
•IVIG, cyclophosphamide, 
cyclosporine, and rituximab are 
third line therapies .
•Inclusion body myositis usually 
responds poorly to steroids and 
immunosuppressive therapies.Learning Objectives
1.To discuss the immunopathogenic mechanisms of myathenia 
gravis, LEMS and Stiff man syndrome.                                                      
                       
2.To recall the autoimmune targets and be able to relate this to the 
development of clinical disease.                                                  
3.To relate clinical testing and treatment to the mechanism of 
disease. 
4.To compare and contrast the etiology, imunopath, and treatment 
of the different noninfectious inflammatory myopathies.