Demyelinating disorders of the CNS 
& PNS,
Congenital & Metabolic disorders
Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine-Harlem
Dr BahriObjectives:  revised
•Recognize congenital malformations of the brain & spinal cord
•Discuss the pathogenesis, morphology, and clinical manifestations of 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillian-Barre syndrome (GBS)
Be able to distinguish MS as  CNS demyelination vs GBS as a PNS 
demyelination
•Distinguish primary demyelinating disorders from acquired  
demyelinating disorders (i.e central pontine myelinolysis and 
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy)
•Distinguish between the pathogenesis, morphology, and clinical 
manifestations of leukodystrophic disorders
•Review some metabolic disturbances of the CNS ( thiamine deficiency, 
vitamin B12 deficiency, hyper/hypoglycemia, and hepatic 
encephalopathy )Congenital malformations
Usually arise as a result of genetic factors or external insults
•Neural tube defect
Anencephaly
Spina bifida: occulta & 
meningocele 
Meningomyelocele
•Forebrain malformation
 Micro- & Megaloencephaly
 Agyria (Lissencephaly), 
Pachygyria & Polymicrogyria
 Holoprosencephaly•Posterior fossa anomalies
 Arnold-Chiari malformation 
(types 1&2)
 Dandy-Walker malformation
•Spinal cord abnormalities
  Hydromyelia
  SyringomyeliaNeural tube defects:
•Due to folate deficiency 
during the initial weeks of 
gestation
•Maternal screening for 
elevated a-fetoprotein
•Prenatal ultrasound & AFP 
screening increases early 
detectionAnencephaly = 
malformation of anterior  
end of neural tube
Neural tube defects
•Most common neural tube 
defects involve the spinal cord 
(as opposed to brain-occipital 
encephalocele)
•Meningomyelocele has 
increased risk for infectionsMeningomyelocele
Review Q1 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
A term infant is born to a 32 yr old whose pregnancy was 
uncomplicated. A newborn PE shows a small lower lumbar skin 
dimple with a protruding tuft of hair. A radiograph show the 
underlying L4 vertebra has lack of closure of the posterior arches. 
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A.Dandy-Walker malformation
B.Spina bifida occulta
C.Tuberous sclerosis
D.Arnold-Chiari malformation
E.MeningomyeloceleReview Q1 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
A term infant is born to a 32 yr old whose pregnancy was 
uncomplicated. A newborn PE shows a small lower lumbar skin 
dimple with a protruding tuft of hair. A radiograph show the 
underlying L4 vertebra has lack of closure of the posterior arches. 
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A.Dandy-Walker malformation
B.Spina bifida occulta
C.Tuberous sclerosis
D.Arnold-Chiari malformation
E.MeningomyeloceleForebrain malformations: Microcephaly
•Small brain, small head
•Associated w/ chromosomal 
abnormalities, fetal alcohol 
syndrome, in utero acquired 
HIV infection
Forebrain malformations: Microcephaly
MicroencephalyNormalLissencephaly
aka Agyria
= absence of cortical gyri
- Gyri pattern does not form 
until after 20 weeks 
gestation ageLissencephaly
•Pachygyria
•PolymicrogyriaForebrain malformation: 
Polymicrogyria 
Green arrow=normal= Small & numerous, irregularly-
formed cerebral convolutionsForebrain malformation: Polymicrogyria
Holoprosencephaly
= Disruption of normal midline 
patterning (hemisphere division)
•Single large ventricle
•Fusion of midline structures
•Associated facial defects including 
cyclopia
•Underlying maternal diabetes or 
chromosomal abnormalities (i.e. 
trisomy 13)Holoprosencephaly
Arnold-Chiari malformations
Type I:
•Low-lying cerebellar tonsils 
extend into foramen magnum
•Obstruction of CSF flow
•Compression of medulla
•Can have associated 
syringomyeliaArnold-Chiari malformations
Type II:
•Small posterior fossa
•Misshapen midline cerebellum
•Downward extension of vermis  
through foramen magnum
•Often associated with 
syringomyelia, hydromelia, spina 
bifida, meningocele, and/or 
hydrocephalusArnold-Chiari type I malformation
Black arrow: Tonsil herniation
White arrow: Cerebellar vermis is not deformed
Arnold-Chiari Type II malformation
Image: Midsagittal section showing small posterior fossa contents, downward displacement of the 
cerebellar vermis, and deformity of the medulla ( arrows indicate the approximate level of the 
foramen magnum).
Dandy-Walker syndrome
3 essential features:
•Enlarged posterior fossa
•Total  or partial agenesis of 
vermis
•Cystic dilatation of 4th
 ventricle:  
area of vermis may have large 
midline cyst in it’s placeDandy-Walker syndrome
Hydromyelia, Syringomyelia, Syrinx 
Hydromyelia:
= Expansion of the central canal  of 
cord
Syringomyelia, Syrinx:
= Fluid-filled cleft-like cavity of the 
inner portion of the cord  (can be 
separate from central canal)
= Acquired form due to blockage of 
CSF
Hydromyelia
Syringomyelia
Review Q2 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
An infant was born at 36 weeks gestation to a 22 yo primagravida. 
Fetal screening at 18 weeks showed a large cerebral ventricle and 
fused thalami. PE: small for gestation age and multiple anomalies 
including cyclopia, polydactyly, cleft lip/palate, microcephaly, and 
rocker-bottom feet. Which of the following CNS abnormalities best 
explains these findings?
A.Anencephaly
B.Arnold-Chiari malformation type II
C.Dandy-Walker malformation
D.Holoprosencephaly
E.Subdural hematomaReview Q2 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
An infant was born at 36 weeks gestation to a 22 yo primagravida. 
Fetal screening at 18 weeks showed a large cerebral ventricle and 
fused thalami. PE: small for gestation age and multiple anomalies 
including cyclopia, polydactyly, cleft lip/palate, microcephaly, and 
rocker-bottom feet. Which of the following CNS abnormalities best 
explains these findings?
A.Anencephaly
B.Arnold-Chiari malformation type II
C.Dandy-Walker malformation
D.Holoprosencephaly
E.Subdural hematomaNext: Myelin disorders
Multiple Sclerosis = Primary disease of myelin
•A demyelinating autoimmune disease of the nervous system
•It is the most common of the demyelinating disorders
•Demyelinating plaques can occur anywhere in the central or the 
peripheral nervous system.
•It affects 1/1000, rarely after age 50
•Again, women: men is about 2:1
•A demyelinating disease affecting neurons of the CNS with both 
motor and sensory dysfunction.
•It involves T-cells directed against myelin proteins,
    with a genetic association with CD25•It has a genetic component (susceptibility to an agent?)
•25% concordance in monozygotic twins
•Association with the HLA-DR2 haplotype 
•Symptoms:
–Cranial nerve signs
–Optic signs  (optic neuritis*) 
–Ataxia
–Other motor and sensory impairments, spasticity
–Late in disease, loss of bladder control, incontinenceMultiple Sclerosis Multiple Sclerosis MS plaques: Radiographic findings
MS plaques: Gross examination
Demyelinated plaques
Laboratory examination
•Mildly elevated CSF proteins
•Increased gamma globulins 
–Not monoclonal, not 
polyclonal but "oligoclonal"
–i.e. something in between 
mono- and polyclonal
= Antibodies directed against a 
variety of antigenic targetsMultiple Sclerosis 
(Dr Stern’s lecture)
Review Q3 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
Three months ago, a 27 yo F had an episode of weakness, which she 
attributed to her job stress and fatigue. Neuro exam: mild residual 
weakness 4/5 motor strength in RLE. Lumbar puncture is performed and 
CSF analysis shows increased IgG levels with prominent oligoclonal bands. 
Brain MRI: small, scattered 0.5 cm areas of demyelination in the 
periventricular white matter. What additional problems can she most 
likely develop?
A.Dementia
B.NonHodgkin’s lymphoma
C.Optic neuritis
D.Quadriplegia
E.Tremor at restReview Q3 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
Three months ago, a 27 yo F had an episode of weakness, which she 
attributed to her job stress and faitgue. Neuro exam: mild residual 
weakness 4/5 motor strength in RLE. Lumbar puncture is performed and 
CSF analysis shows increased IgG levels with prominent oligoclonal bands . 
Brain MRI: small, scattered 0.5 cm areas of demyelination in the 
periventricular  white matter. What additional problems can she most 
likely develop?
A.Dementia
B.NonHodgkin’s lymphoma
C.Optic neuritis
D.Quadriplegia
E.Tremor at rest“To be diagnosed was the hardest thing because I 
didn’t know what they were talking about,” CBS 
quotes the star as saying. “And the doctor said 
`Don’t worry, in three months you’ll know.’
“So I went about my business and then, one day, it 
jumped me. I couldn’t get up. … Your muscles 
trick you; they did me.”
Although he attempted to continue working, it soon 
became evident that has MS was progressing, he 
was becoming more and more a shadow of 
himself. He still made cameo appearances and 
claimed royalties from his classic work, however 
working full time with the disease was not to be.
After nearly two decades of battling MS, Richard 
Pryor passed away due to cardiac arrest in 
December 2005.
Multiple Sclerosis Oligoclonal bands are detected on Protein 
electrophoresis of CSF
Stop for a sec…
Mini-tutorial on protein electrophoresis (PEP)
(won’t be on exam, but don’t phase it out)Plasma cell:
Figure 3-3 Electron microscopic photograph of a lymphocyte and a plasma cell. A, The 
cytoplasm of the lymphocyte is scant and contains few organelles. B, The cytoplasm of the 
plasma cell is well developed and contains prominent rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). The 
RER serves as the site for production of immunoglobulins .
Damjanov, Ivan. Pathology for the Health Professions, 3rd Edition . W.B. Saunders CompanyPlasma cell:
Normal Serum PEP (SPEP)
1.Albumin
2.Alpha1
•a-1 antitrypsin
•Thyroid binding globulin
•Transcortin
3.Alpha2
•Ceruloplasmin
•a-2 macroglobulin
•Haptoglobin
4.Beta1
•Transferrin
5. Beta2
•b-lipoprotein
•C3 & complement
6. Gamma (Ig’s)
Conditions
•Acute inflammation
•Malignancy 
•Trauma
•Necrosis, Infarction
•Burns
•Chemical injurySPEP can be performed to determine 
presence of Acute phase proteins :
Increased
•a-1 antitrypsin
• Ceruloplasmin
•Haptoglobin
•C-reactive protein
•C3 complement
•Fibrinogen
Decreased
•Albumin
•TransferrinBack to the rest of the lecture…
Guillian-Barre syndrome
•Most common life-threatening disease of  the peripheral nervous 
system (according to Robbin’s)
•May develop spontaneously or after a systemic infection(usually 
viral)
•Rapidly progressive ascending motor weakness
 Respiratory failure (diaphragm involved)
•  Histology: segmental demyelination of peripheral nerves ; 
infiltration of macrophages and reactive lymphocytes
•  CSF analysis: Increased proteins, minimal cellular reaction
•  Tx: Plasmapheresis or IVIG (shortens disease)
Supportive care (individuals can recover over time)1.Central pontine 
myelinolysis
= non-immune process 
involve center of pons
•Occurs with chronic 
alchoholism and rapid 
correction of 
hyponatremia
2.PML (next slide)Acquired demyelinating diseases
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)
•Viral encephalitis due to  
JC polyomavirus
•Virus infects 
oligodendrocytes
•Seen in immuno-
suppressed patients
•Thought to be reactivation 
of virus in the setting of 
immunosuppression
•Clinical:  Progressive 
neurologic symptoms
•Imaging: Multifocal 
lesions in white matter
Image: Section stained for myelin showing irregular, poorly 
defined areas of demyelination (arrows), which become 
confluent in places. Inset, Enlarged oligodendrocyte nucleus 
represents the effect of viral infection.Leukodystrophies = Primary disease of myelin
= Inherited dysmyelinating diseases due to either
 Abnormal myelin synthesis
 Myelin turnover 
•  Some are associated with lysosomal enzymes or mutations in 
myelin protein
•  Most cases are autosomal recessive; some are X-linked
•  Morphology: Decreased, grey to translucent white matter
  Sparing of subcortical myelin is often seen
  Can see macrophages full of lipid
  Some disorders have inclusions (accumulation of lipids)
•  Clinical manifestations: Children are normal at birth, but start to 
miss their developmental milestones, and have progressively  
deterioration in motor skillsLeukodystrophies:  Selected disorders
•Metachromatic leukodystrophy
•Krabbe disease
•Adrenoleukodystrophy
•Canavan disease
•Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
•Vanishing white matter disease
•Alexander diseaseMetachromatic leukodystrophy
•Arylsulfatase A deficiency
Axons with thin myelin sheathsDiagnosis?
What is the most likely 
diagnosis?
Wernicke disease 
(encephalopathy)
What is the pathophysiology of 
this condition?
Thiamine deficiency: Thiamine 
pyrophosphate is required for 
oxidative metabolism of 
pyruvate for ATP production
Wernicke-Korsakoff 
syndrome
•Predominantly seen in chronic 
alcoholics 
•Wernicke encephalopathy – 
hemorrhage; earlier phase
Ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus, 
ataxia, confusion
•Wernicke encephalopathy progresses 
to Korsakoff syndromeWernicke-Korsakoff 
syndrome
•Korsakoff syndrome  – atrophy; later 
phase
Profound memory loss/distortion, 
confabulation (fill in blanks)
•Lesions can be detected on MRI 
(increased uptake)
•Affected areas: Mammillary bodies, 
cerebellum, cortexWernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
The 58 yo female with a 30 year history of Crohn’s disease complains of fatigue, 
feeling clumsy “tripping over feet,” and numbness & tingling in her legs. 
PSH: 10 years ago: ileal resection
PE: Ataxic gait; Paresthesia and weakness in hands & feet;  Decreased 
vibration and positional sense
CBC:WBC: WNL
Hb/Hct:  11 mg/dL; 33%  (decreased)
MCV: 120 (increased)
PBS: Macrocytic red cells; hyperlobulated neutrophils
Folate level: Normal
What are the most likely diagnoses?Case: “Feeling clumsy”The 58 yo female with a 30 year history of Crohn’s disease complains of fatigue, 
feeling clumsy “tripping over feet,” and numbness & tingling in her legs. 
PSH: 10 years ago: ileal resection
PE: Ataxic gait; Paresthesia and weakness in hands & feet;  Decreased 
vibration and positional sense
CBC:WBC: WNL
Hb/Hct:  11 mg/dL; 33%  (decreased)
MCV: 120 (increased)
PBS: Macrocytic red cells; hyperlobulated neutrophils
Folate level: Normal
What are the most likely diagnoses?
Vitamin B12 deficiency:  Megaloblastic anemiaCase: “Feeling clumsy”Megaloblastic anemia:
Due to 
Pernicious anemia (lack of 
intrinsic factor)
Strict vegetarian diet (no animal 
product)
Loss of terminal ileum function
Malabsorption (celiac sprue, 
Crohn’s ileitis, infectious 
enteritis)
Diphyllobthrium latum (fish 
tapeworm infection) Subacute combined degeneration 
•Involves the ascending and 
descending fiber bundles 
(combined)
•Degeneration of the 
posterior and lateral 
columns
http://www.neuropathologyweb.org/chapter8/
chapter8Nutritional.htmlReview Q4 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
A 12 yo girl had progressively diminishing neurologic function over 3 
years. She had difficulty with movement, decreased mental ability, and 
loss of bladder & bowel control. While in the hospital, she contracted 
pneumonia and died. Autopsy revealed brain atrophy, and shrunken 
central white matter. Microscopically, widespread myelin loss with 
sparing of the subcortical U fibers. Which of the following disorders best 
explains the course of this illness?
A.Metachromatic leukodystrophy
B.Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
C.Tay-Sach’s disease
D.Multiple sclerosis
E.Hepatic encephalopathyReview Q4 (from Robbin’s Review 3rd
 ed) 
A 12 yo girl had progressively diminishing neurologic function over 3 
years. She had difficulty with movement, decreased mental ability, and 
loss of bladder & bowel control. While in the hospital, she contracted 
pneumonia and died. Autopsy revealed brain atrophy, and shrunken 
central white matter. Microscopically, widespread myelin loss with 
sparing of the subcortical U fibers. Which of the following disorders best 
explains the course of this illness?
A.Metachromatic leukodystrophy
B.Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
C.Tay-Sach’s disease
D.Multiple sclerosis
E.Hepatic encephalopathyHyper/Hypoglycemia
•Acquired metabolic disorder
•CNS dysfunction can occur with 
altered glucose levelsHypoglycemia
•Brain requires glucose for energy 
production
•Diminished glucose resembles 
hypoxia
•If duration of hypoglycemia is 
severe, may lead to diffuse brain 
injury
•Patients can have syncopal 
episodeHyperglycemia
•Associated with setting of 
uncontrolled  diabetes mellitus
•Can be associated with 
hyperosmolar coma or 
ketoacidosis
•Increased glucose leads to osmotic 
water accumulation in neurons
•Patients  can develop confusion, 
stupor , or comaHepatic encephalopathy
•Decreased hepatic function
Cirrhosis,  liver failure
 Liver fails to clear ammonia 
through urea cycle
 Metabolic products (ammonia) 
affect the brain
•Lab:  Hypoproteinemia,  
increased ammonia (varies)Hepatic encephalopathy
•Symptoms
 Early stages: “flapping “ 
tremor (asterixis-see link 
below), hyperactive reflexes, 
mental changes
 Depressed consciousness
 Coma
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zxdz_m5gcpU&feature=relatedCelebrities with MS
Annette Funicello
Montell WilliamsTamia