Diseases of the PancreasElizabeth Williams, DOClinical SystemsGastroenterology ModuleTouro COM Middletown, NYSome slides modified from Lisa Ganjhu, DO AGAF, FACG lecture

Objectives•Pancreatitis•Define Acute pancreatitis•Define Chronic pancreatitis•Identify etiology, clinical presentation and physical exam findings•Describe and discuss diagnosis, treatment, and complications of both acute and chronic pancreatitis

Reading•Goldman-Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 25th  e, Chapters 132 & 144•Bates, Guide to Physical Examination, 11th  edition, Chapter 11

Pancreas•Retroperitoneal gland located in the upper, posterior abdomen behind the stomach•Lies Across L1-2•Responsible for insulin production (20%) (endocrine pancreas)  •Manufacture and secretion of digestive enzymes (exocrine pancreas) leading to carbohydrate, fat, & protein metabolism (80%).

Splenic a. sorepic v.

mesenteric a.

Inf, vena caval
'S. mesenteric v.,

. Mesenteric v.

Figure 1. The pancreas. The pancreas has 4 parts: the head, neck, body
and tail. Figure 1A is an anatomical drawing showing the vascular supply of
the pancreas. Figure 1b shows a cross sectional image of the pancreas
obtained from a normal human. Clinically such an image can be obtained by
computed Tomography (CT). The pancreas lies behind the stomach which has
been removed to visualize the pancreas. Part of the colon and loops of small
bowel are also anterior to the pancreas. Behind the pancreas lie a number of
large blood vessels including the portal vein, inferior vena cava, aorta,
superior mesenteric artery and vein, kidneys and vertebrae. The distal
common bile duct passes through the head of the pancreas. Adapted from
Gorelick F, Pandol, SJ, Topazian M. Pancreatic physiology, pathophysiology,
acute and chronic pancreatitis. Gastrointestinal Teaching Project, American
Gastroenterologic Association. 2003.


A
Normal
anatomy

Common
bile duct -

Accessory
papilla and
duct of

Santorini

Ampulla of
Vater (common
bile duct and

duct of Wirsung) ~


Etiology
•Hereditary pancreatitis (<1%)•Hypercalcemia (<1%)•Developmental abnormalities of the pancreas (<1%)•Hypertriglyceridemia (<1%)•Toxins (<1%)•Postoperative (<1%)•Vasculitis (<1%)•Autoimmune pancreatitis (<1%)

“I GET SMASHED”•Idiopathic•Gallstones•Ethanol•Trauma•Steroids•Mumps•Autoimmune•Scorpion•Hypercalcemia/hyperlipidemia (> 1000mg/dl)•ERCP•Drugs

Biliary Causes


Illustration by hfyriam Kirkman-Oh

FIGURE 1.
Biliary tract obstruction caused by a gallstone in the distal common bile duct.


Gallbladder

Gallstones

Be

Santorini (minor
pancreatic duct)

Wirsung (major
pancreatic duct)



Alcohol•Major cause of acute pancreatitis•Unclear mechanism•Occurs in acute and chronic ingestion

Toxic metabolites
Non-oxidative
Abnormal blood flow and Oxidative

f

secretion

release

Figure 4. Effects of alcohol on the pancreas. Changes in pancreatic
blood flow, coupled with the generation of free radicals from ethanol
metabolism, may cause free radical damage. Stimulation of pancreatic
secretion coupled with spasm of the sphincter of Oddi could lead to an acute
obstructive injury. Adapted from Gorelick F, Pandol, SJ, Topazian M.
Pancreatic physiology, pathophysiology, acute and chronic pancreatitis. 2003.


Post-ERCP


Trauma•Penetrating or blunt•Handle Bar injury•Steering wheel


Drugs


Infection•Viral•*mumps, Epstein-Barr, coxsackievirus, echovirus, varicella-zoster, and measles.•Bacterial•Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Salmonella, Campylobacter, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis•Ascariasis•Pancreatitis has been associated with AIDS•opportunistic infections, neoplasms, lipodystrophy, or drug therapies.

Hereditary Pancreatitis 


Metabolic Causes•Hypercalcemia •Hyperparathyroidism, excessive doses of vitamin D, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, and total parenteral nutrition (TPN).•Hypertriglyceridemia (<1%)•Triglyceride level reaches > 1000 mg/dL•Associated with type I & type V hyperlipidemia

Toxins•Organophosphate insecticide•Sting of the scorpion Tityus trinitatis 


Autoimmune Pancreatitis


Developmental Abnormalities •Pancreas divisum is a failure of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic ducts to fuse during embryogenesis


Developmental Abnormalities •Annular pancreas is an uncommon congenital anomaly in which a band of pancreatic tissue surrounds the second part of the duodenum. 


A

Normal
anatomy
Common
bile duct

Accessory
papilla and
duct of
Santorini

Ampulia of
Vater (common
bile duct and
duct of Wirsung)



Pathophysiology of Pancreatitis•Caused by activation of pancreatic enzymes, leading to auto digestion with hemorrhagic fat necrosis•Extracellular factors •neural response•vascular response•Intracellular factors•intracellular digestive enzyme activation•increased calcium signaling•heat shock protein activation

Presentation of Acute Pancreatitis•Sudden onset epigastric abdominal pain radiating to back and flanks•Nausea +/- vomiting•Anorexia•Following large meal or binge drinking

Physical Exam•Fever and tachycardia are common abnormal vital signs•Epigastric pain with palpation•Guarding upper abdomen•Hypoactive bowel sounds •due to ileus•Jaundice•if due to pancreatic head tumor or gallstone pancreatitis with retained common bile duct stone•Dyspnea•consider acute respiratory distress syndrome

Purtscher Retinopathyis a hemorrhagic and vaso-occlusive vasculopathy, leuko-embolization that causes arterial occlusion and infarction of the microvascular bed


Cullen Sign: bluish discoloration around the umbilicus resulting from hemoperitoneum and pancreatic necrosis 

Grey Turner: is a reddish-brown discoloration along the flanks resulting from retroperitoneal blood dissecting along tissue planes


Ranson’s Criteria for the Prediction of Severe
Acute Pancreatitis

Age older than 55 years Lactate dehydrogenase > 350 IU/L
Serum white blood cell count > 16,000 mm? | Aspartate aminotransferase > 250 IU/L
Serum glucose > 200 mg/dL

Hematocrit decrease > 10% | Estimated fluid sequestration > 6 L
Blood urea nitrogen increase > 5 mg/dL Calcium < 8 mg/dL

Base deficit > 4 mEq/L PaO. < 60 mm Hg

Ranson's prognostic scale (96% accuracy rate)
< 3 signs = 1% mortality rate 5 or 6 signs = 40% mortality rate
3 or 4 signs = 15% mortality rate > 6 signs = 100% mortality rate



Diagnosis•Clinical symptoms + Imaging and Labs•Abdominal Pain•Elevation in amylase and lipase (> 3x ULN)•Lipase more specific•Leukocytosis•CT findings pancreatic edema or necrosis, ileus

Laboratory Studies•CBC•Complete metabolic panel•Amylase and Lipase•AST, ALT, TB, DB, Alk Phos•If elevated think of gallstone pancreatitis•Calcium, magnesium, cholesterol, and triglycerides •C-reactive protein•Arterial blood gases•IgG4 levels can be checked to evaluate for autoimmune pancreatitis.

Imaging Studies•Abdominal radiography•Ultrasound •Abdominal CT•MRCP •Endoscopic ultrasound

FIGURE 2.

Contrast-enhanced axial computed tomographic section of the upper abdomen showing peripancreatic and
retroperitoneal edema (large arrows) and stranding. The pancreas itself (smal! arrow) appears relatively
normal


FIGURE 4.

Contrast-enhanced axial computed tomographic section of the upper abdomen showing a well-defined fluid
collection in the retroperitoneum (arrow) just below the level of the pancreas


Procedures•Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, ERCP•if a patient has severe acute pancreatitis due to choledocholithiasis and stone still present in CBD•Symptoms of cholangitis•CT-guided needle aspiration•to differentiate infected necrosis and sterile necrosis 

Treatment•NPO•IVF•Pain Medications•(Morphine may cause spasm of sphincter of Oddi and worsen pain; meperidine is preferred analgesic)•Nutrition•Enteral preferred over parenteral•Clear liquid, full liquid, low fat

Potential Complications & Management•Chronic Pancreatitis•Infected pancreatic necrosis•Pancreatic pseudo cyst•Intra-abdominal hemorrhage•Multi-organ system failure

Recurrent Acute Pancreatitis•Abdominal CT scanning is a reasonable first approach•If neoplasia or chronic pancreatitis is found, it must be addressed and treated accordingly•If the CT scan is not diagnostic, order MRCP•If this shows developmental abnormalities, strictures, or evidence of chronic pancreatitis, remember that endoscopic or surgical treatment may be of benefit in a subset of patients

Recurrent Acute Pancreatitis•If the MRCP findings are normal, further evaluation by EUS is indicated.• This has a better sensitivity for detecting biliary sludge and microlithiasis, which are probably the most common causes of recurrent idiopathic pancreatitis. •EUS may also help detect peri-ampullary lesions missed by abdominal CT scanning or MRCP

Chronic Pancreatitis•Continuing chronic inflammatory process of the pancreas, characterized by irreversible morphological changes•Chronic abdominal pain and/orimpairment of endocrine and exocrine function of the pancreas•Atrophic fibrotic gland with dilated ducts and calcifications•Present with DM and steatorrhea

Pathophysiology•Intraductal plugging and obstruction (e.g., ETOH abuse, stones, tumors)•Direct toxins and toxic metabolites•Oxidative stress (e.g., idiopathic pancreatitis)•Necrosis-fibrosis (recurrent acute pancreatitis that heals with fibrosis)•Ischemia (from obstruction and fibrosis)•Autoimmune disorders: Chronic pancreatitis has been found in association with other autoimmune diseases

*History*•Abdominal pain•Persistent, worsened by high fat foods•Diarrhea/steatorrhea•Malabsorption •Fat soluble vitamin deficiency (ADEK)•New onset DM•Weight loss•This may be due either to fear of eating (e.g., postprandial exacerbation of pain) or due to pancreatic exocrine insufficiency

Physical•Dull boring epigastric pain•Cachexia•Temporal wasting

Causes•Alcohol•Hereditary Pancreatitis•Cystic Fibrosis•Hyperlipidemia•Medications•Idiopathic•Obstruction•Autoimmune

Diagnosis•Normal or minimally elevated amylase and lipase  •CT scan•calcifications•ERCP•"chain of lakes" •MRCP•EUS

Treatment & Management•Behavior modification•Pain management•Moderate fat diet•Enteric coated lipase (pancreatic enzyme)

Diet•A diet low in fat and high in protein and carbohydrates is recommended, especially in patients with steatorrhea •Specific recommendations include a daily diet of 2000-3000 calories, consisting of 1.5-2 g/kg of protein, 5-6 g/kg of carbohydrates, and 20-25% of total calories consumed as fat (about 50-75 g) per day

DIET•Malabsorption of the fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) and vitamin B-12 may also occur •Water soluble replacement (AquaADEK)

Inpatient care•NPO•IVF•Narcotic analgesics

Complications•Pseudocyst•Bile obstruction and duodenal obstruction•Diabetes mellitus •Splenic vein thrombosis•Pseudo aneurysm

Pseudocyst


Pseudocyst



Prognosis•Prognosis of chronic pancreatitis is associated with:•Age at diagnosis•Smoking•Continued use of alcohol•Presence of liver cirrhosis•Overall survival rate is 70% at 10 years & 45% at 20 years.•Risk of developing pancreatic cancer is approximately 4% at 20 years.

References•http://www.emedicine.com•Gastroenterology Teaching project; AGA•Slides adapted from Dr. Ganjhu